The Death of Francis
 
Twentieth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
In the moment of Francis’s death, a friar beheld the soul of the Saint
ascending to heaven in the form of a brilliant star. The depicted event
occurred on October 3, 1226.
 
This fresco is complex because it connects Francis’s death with his burial
via the representation of the blessing of his body. In the foreground
the dead Francis is lying on a wooden board with his head resting on
a pillow. The stigmata are clearly visible. Eleven grieving friars,
like the eleven apostles minus Judas, surround the dead body of their
master. One of them kisses the Saint’s foot, another holds his hand,
while most of the others gather around the head of their father. Behind
the group of friars immersed in their sorrow, an entourage of the Saint’s
companions occupies the scene’s entire background. In the middle we can
see a priest wearing a tunic, a stole and a maniple. He is holding a book
with one hand and an aspersorium for holy water with the other. To the
left a friar wearing a deacon’s alb, carries the container of the holy
water and a thurible for incense. On either side of the celebrant there
are two torchbearers. This imagery in the scene represents Francis’s
funeral-rites and burial.
 
In the upper part of the fresco four angels carry Francis’s soul to
heaven. On each side of these angels are two more groups of three Angels
each. Francis’s soul is represented by the Saint’s bust painted within a
sphere of light. Only the friar kneeling at the head of the dead Saint
is witnessing what is happening high up in the sky. His look is turned
toward Francis’s soul while his hand grasps his beard. This imagery in
the scene represents Francis’s death.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first “death of Francis” scene
connects the brothers’ anguish over Francis’s death with the Holy Family’s
anguish over Jesus’ salvific destiny (upper register), as depicted by
Simeon and Anna’s bittersweet comments regarding the Messiah, and by the
Holy Family’s fight into Egypt to avoid Herod’s slaughter. Moreover,
the events of Francis’s death, as described in the Major Legend,
parallel Jesus’ suffering and crucifixion in the scenes above (middle
register). First, as Francis prepared to die, he “crossed his arms in
the form of a cross;” second, before he passed, Francis reminded his
brothers that “trial and tribulation is coming” but that through their
suffering they will share in Christ’s suffering; and third, Francis
asked that John’s account of Christ’s Passion be read as he died. This
is accentuated by the foot of Christ’s cross that points downward toward
Francis (middle register), which highlights that just as Jesus journeys
toward His death, Francis follows Christ as he journeys toward his.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 14.5-6
 
When the hour of his passing was approaching, he had all the brothers
staying in the place called to him and, comforting them about his death
with words of consolation, he exhorted them to divine love with fatherly
affection. He spoke at length about preserving poverty and patience and
the faith of the holy Roman Church, placing the holy Gospel ahead of
other observances. As all the brothers sat around him, he stretched his
hand over them, crossing his arms in the form of a cross, for he always
loved this sign. And he blessed all the brothers, both present and absent,
in the name and power of the Crucified. Then he added: “Good bye, all my
sons, in the fear of the Lord! Remain in Him always! Because a trial and
tribulation is coming in the future, happy are they who will persevere
in those things they have begun. I am hurrying to God, to whose grace
I entrust all of you.” When he finished this gentle admonition, the man
most beloved of God ordered the Book of the Gospels brought to him and
asked that the Gospel according to John be read to him from the place
that begins: Before the feast of Passover. He, as best he could, broke
out in this psalm: With my voice I cried to the Lord; With my voice I
beseeched the Lord; and he finished it to the end. The just, he said,
will await me until you have rewarded me.
 
At last, when all of the mysteries were fulfilled in him and that most
holy soul was released from the flesh and absorbed into the abyss of
the divine light, the blessed man fell asleep in the Lord. One of his
brothers and followers saw that blessed soul under the appearance of a
radiant star carried up on a shining cloud to be borne aloft straight to
heaven over many waters, as if shining with the brightness of sublime
sanctity, and filled with the abundance of heavenly wisdom and grace,
by which the holy man merited to enter the place of light and peace
where he rests with Christ forever. (1C 108-10, 2C 216-17)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 643-44.