Francis Honored by a Fellow Citizen
 
First Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
The fresco shows an ordinary citizen of Assisi spreading his cloak on the
ground before Francis, who is still rather young. Thus, he gave honor to
Francis and asserted, under inspiration from God, that Francis was worthy
of respect and reverence by all because he was going to accomplish great
things. The depicted event occurred sometime before 1205.
 
Francis, with his head surrounded by a halo but still wearing the dress
of a merchant’s rich son, steps on a mantle laid in front of him by a
man kneeling in a respectful manner. Francis and the kneeling man are the
central figures of the scene. Behind each of them, stand two personages,
middle-class men from Assisi, who discuss the strange event with looks of
surprise. It is interesting to realize how the mutual connection occurs:
what first appears as two groups of three people each, turns out, under
more careful observation, to be three groups of two persons each. The two
men on the left, like the two men on the right, are discussing with each
other, while Francis is put into relation with the man kneeling in front
of him with deep respect. The centre of the scene is empty of people; the
mantle laid on the ground makes the connection between the three groups.
 
The scene takes place in front of a Roman temple representing the temple
of Minerva found in the city square of Assisi, even though the number of
columns and the façade of the edifice do not exactly correspond to the
real building. The landscape represented here may be, chronologically
speaking, the first “view,” presented by Italian painting on Italian soil.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first scene of Francis’s “initial
conversion” parallels the new creation of Noah’s covenant with God
(middle register), and indicates that just as God created Adam (upper
register), Francis’s conversion is also a product of God’s work.
 
The protrusion above the temple is the wall mount for the now removed rood
screen (iconostasis), which was a physical and symbolic barrier separating
the sanctuary, the area reserved for the ordained, from the nave where
the laity gathered to worship. The iconostasis was removed after the
Council of Trent (ended 1563) in latter part of the sixteenth century.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 1.1
 
There was a man in the city of Assisi, named Francis whose memory is
held in benediction, because God graciously preceded him with blessings
of sweetness, mercifully snatching him from the dangers of the present
life, and richly filling him with gifts of heavenly grace. For at a
young age, he lived among foolish children of mortals and was brought
up in foolish ways. After acquiring a little knowledge of reading and
writing, he was assigned to work in a lucrative merchant’s business. Yet
with God’s protection, although he indulged himself in pleasures, even
among wanton youths, he did not give himself over to the drives of the
flesh; not even among greedy merchants did he place his hope in money
or treasures, although he was intent on making a profit. There was to
be sure, growing with him from his infancy, a generous care for the
poor divinely implanted in the heart of the young Francis. It had so
filled his heart with kindness that, even at that time, he resolved not
to be a deaf hearer of the Gospel but to give to everyone who begged,
especially if he asked out of “divine love.” On one occasion, however,
when he was caught up in the pressures of business, contrary to his
usual manner of acting, he sent away empty-handed a poor man who had
begged alms for the love of God. Immediately turning back to his heart,
he ran after him, and, gently with extravagant alms, he promised God
that from that moment, while he had the means, he would not refuse those
who begged from him for the love of God. He observed this with untiring
piety until his death and merited an abundant increase of grace and love
for God. For afterwards, when he had perfectly put on Christ, he would
say that even while he was in secular attire, he could scarcely ever
hear any mention of the divine love without being deeply moved in his
heart. At the same time, the sensitivity of his gentleness, together
with a refined set of manners, a patience and affability beyond human
decorum, and a generosity beyond his means singled him out as a young
man of flourishing natural disposition. This seemed to be a prelude to
the even greater abundance of God’s blessings that would be showered on
him in the future. Indeed a certain exceptionally simple man of Assisi,
whom, it is believed, God had instructed, whenever he chanced to meet
Francis going through the city, used to take off his cloak and spread the
garment under his feet, claiming that Francis was worthy of reverence,
since he was destined to do great things in the near future and would
be magnificently honored by the entire body of the faithful. (1C 1-4,
1C 17, 1C 22, 2C 5, 2C 7, 2C 55, 2C 196)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 530-31.