The Ecstasy of Francis
 
Twelfth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
One day as Francis was rapt in fervent prayer, the brothers saw him raised
above the ground with his arms extended toward heaven. A bright cloud
surrounded him. The depicted event occurred sometime during 1220 and 1223.
 
This scene occurs in front of a town door. On the left, four companions of
Francis’s are painted in an attitude of astonishment and surprise. They
fix their eyes on Francis who is lifted up from the ground and wrapped
in a cloud. One caught by surprise, stops his movement all of a sudden,
while another leans back in frightened amazement.
 
In the scene’s center, Francis opens his arms to form a cross while
looking at Christ Who bends down from a six-ringed celestial heaven to
bless him. The landscape is just hinted at by three small trees standing
on the farthest right below Christ.
 
Within the context of the bay, this third “peace scene” depicts Francis
attaining contemplative peace in ecstasy. Francis, having found the
peace of “a more secret hiding place” now converses with the Lord who
reveals to Francis, “the unknown and hidden secrets of divine wisdom.”
Thus, Francis’s practice of contemplation enabled him to become a man of
peace like Christ. Such peace compares to Joseph’s restoration of peace
among his brothers (middle register), but contrasts with Cain’s violence
(upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 10.4
 
The man of God remaining more alone and at peace would fill the forest
with groans, water the places with tears, strike his breast with his hand,
and, as if finding a more secret hiding place, would converse with his
Lord. There he replied to the Judge, there he entreated the Father,
there he conversed with the Friend. There too the brothers who were
devoutly observing him heard him on several occasions groan with loud
cries, imploring the divine clemency for sinners, and weeping over the
Lord’s passion as if it were before him. There he was seen praying at
night, with his hands outstretched in the form of a cross, his whole body
lifted up from the ground and surrounded by a sort of shining cloud, so
that the extraordinary illumination around his body was a witness to the
wonderful light that shone within his soul. There too, as is proven by
certain evidence, the unknown and hidden secrets of divine wisdom were
opened up to him, although he never spoke of them outside except when
the love of Christ urged him and the good of his neighbor demanded. For
he used to say: “It happens that one loses something priceless for the
sake of a small reward, and easily provokes the giver not to give again.”
(2C 11, 2C 95, 2C 99)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 607-08.