The Windows
 
The upper church contains approximately forty windows (depending on how
one counts). These were the first figured stained-glass windows in Italy,
and still remain the largest. They are among the best examples of 13th
century glasswork. The descriptions below follow the chronological order
of the windows' completions.
 
1. APSE
 
The apse contains three two-light windows that apply the medieval
exegetical practice of typological concordance between the Old and New
Testaments to represent the life of Christ. In effect, these windows
demonstrate how Christ's childhood (left), public ministry (center), and
passion (right) were all prefigured in the Old Testament. The windows
are the artwork of German-influenced workshops that completed the work
between 1235-55. They were likely completed sometime during the papacy of
Gregory IX (1227-41), before Brother Elias's removal in 1239. However,
some argue for a completion date closer to the church's consecration in
1253, during the papacy of Innocent IV (1243-54). The central rose window
presenting Sixtus IV's coat of arms was added in 1477. Regardless of
the precise date of completion, most of the stained-glass in the right
window of the left two-light and some of the right window of the right
two-light have been restored with modern glass.
 
2. TRANSEPT
 
The south transept's stained-glass in the four-light window contains
scenes depicting 'Creation' and 'Original Sin and Its Consequences' in the
left two-lights and the 'Order of Virgins' in the right two-lights. Above
the four-light window are two quadrilobes; the left contains Christ in
benediction between Sts Francis and Anthony of Padua, and the right
presents Mary and Child between Isaiah and Jeremiah. The rose window
shows ornamental motifs with two roundels containing Jeremiah (left)
and Abraham (right) bordering each side. The windows are the artwork
of French origin with features reminiscent of 'rayonnant' Gothic. Since
the 'Order of Virgins' includes a haloed St Clare, the window postdates
her canonization in 1255 and was likely completed around 1275. Some of
windows in the upper portion have been restored with modern glass.
 
The north transept's stained-glass in the four-light window contains
ornamental motifs in the left two-lights and scenes of Old Testament
appearances of angels that typologically concord with the appearances of
the Risen Christ in the right two-lights. Above the four-light window
there are two decorative quadrilobes surmounted by a rose window that
depicts the Ascension. Therein, an enthroned Christ is surrounded by six
angels and the apostles and Mary below. Two roundels containing David
(left) and Isaiah (right) border the rose window on each side. The
windows are attributed to the Umbrian workshop of the anonymous 'St
Francis Master' who completed the work between 1275-80.
 
3. NAVE
 
The massive rose window, restored in the 1890's, dominates the nave from
its location in the counter-façade. The wheel within wheel configuration
signifies Ezekiel's vision (Ezek 1:1-28; 10:1-22). The initials IHS,
a monogram for Jesus Christ, reside in the center. The rest of the nave
contains eight two-light windows. Five of these (bay 2, north wall and
bays 3-4) comprise an apostolic cycle, which includes all the apostles
except Peter and Paul. Their exclusion is probably intentional because
they have been replaced by Sts Francis and Anthony of Padua (bay 1, north
wall), who are now identified as apostles because of their preaching
activity. However, Peter and Paul are not absent from the nave, rather,
their frescoed representations are prominently found on each side of
the great rose window in the counter-façade. The remaining two-light
windows represent 'Christ Presenting St Francis' and 'The Virgin and
Child' (bay 1, south wall) and 'God the Father and Prophets' and 'Christ
and Saints' (bay 2, south wall), which parallel the prophets of the Old
Testament with the saints of Christianity. Together, the nave's windows
form a pictorial cycle that begins with Christ and Mary, proceeds to
the prophets and saints, continues through ten apostles, and ends with
Sts Francis and Anthony of Padua. The apostolic windows depicting James
the Greater and Andrew (bay 4, north wall) and John and Thomas (bay
3, north wall) were created by the same French workshop that produced
the window in the south transept. The remaining six two-light windows
were created by Umbrian workshop of the anonymous 'St Francis Master'
who also completed the window in the north transept. Work on the nave
windows were commissioned during the papacy of Alexander IV (1254-61)
and were finished during the last quarter of the 13th century, but the
windows depicting Sts Francis and Anthony of Padua (bay 1, north wall)
may have been completed as late as 1315-25. The windows in bays 2-4,
south wall, have been restored with modern glass.
