St. Francis of Assisi Biographical Chronology
 
ca. 1181/2: Francis is born to Lady Pica and Pietro Bernadone in
Assisi. Pica has him baptized Giovanni in the church of San Rufino while
Pietro, a cloth merchant, was away on business in France. Upon return,
Pietro renames his son Francesco or "Frenchman."
 
1189: At 8, Francis begins his schooling at the parish church of San
Giorgio (1C 23), run by the canons of the cathedral. It was Francis's only
formal education, which likely included grammar, rhetoric and mathematics.
 
1195: At 14, Francis joins his father's business and officially enters the
cloth merchant trade by becoming a member of the Corporation of Merchants,
but in a more general sense Francis joins the Assisi bourgeoisie, and
the form of life that often accompanies it (1C 1-2).
 
1198: At 17, Francis likely assists the Assisi townspeople in the
destruction of the Rocca Maggiore fortress in Assisi. After the uprising,
Francis helps rebuild the fortress and learns rudimentary masonry
skills. The uprising signals the socio-economic changes brought about
by the shift from the feudal system where the aristocracy wielded power
to the mercantile system where the growing bourgeoisie wielded power
because of its growing wealth.
 
1199: The socio-economic changes erupt into a civil war in Assisi. The war
ends with the city's emancipation from the feudal lords and reconstitution
as a commune. However, the unrest in Assisi spreads to the neighboring
town of Perugia, and the two towns remain in conflict until 1209.
 
1202: At 21, Francis fights in the November battle of Ponte San Giovanni
between Assisi and Perugia (L3C 5; 2C 4). Francis is captured and
imprisoned in Perugia for a year. The conditions of the prison make
Francis sick.
 
1203: Francis's deteriorating health spurs his ransom from prison. He
returns to Assisi seriously ill.
 
1204: During Francis's long convalescence the inner stirrings of his
conversion begin (1C 3-5).
 
1205: At 23, Francis struggles to discern the feelings stirred up by
his illness. In the spring, his first response was to join the military
campaigns of the papal army, which was fighting against the German
empire in Apulia (1C 4). However, illness returned during Francis's way
to Spoleto, where Francis had a dream in which Christ commanded him to
return home (1C 5). After returning to Assisi with his military dreams
gone, Francis's second response differs drastically. He begins to withdraw
from the worldly life and from his former friends, dresses as a hermit,
and retreats beyond the Assisi walls into the Umbrian countryside for
solitude and prayer (1C 6-7). In the summer, he begins living with
lepers and other outcasts of society at Rivo Torto (1C 17, 42, 103;
ER 9). Later that fall, he experiences Christ at San Damiano (L3C 13;
2C 10) and quarrels with his father over the family's reputation and
money, which Francis was using to assist the poor and rebuild churches
(1C 10-12). During this period, Francis writes "The Prayer before the
Crucifix."
 
1206: In the spring, Francis's father brings formal charges against him
(1C 13-15). The trial is held before Bishop Guido of Assisi. Pietro
demands that his merchandise be returned. Francis responds by renouncing
his father and all his worldly belongings. The bishop offers Francis
refuge.
 
1206-08: While still living with outcasts, Francis continues his work
as a penitent-mason. He rebuilds the three churches of San Damiano, San
Pietro, and San Maria degli Angeli, which is also called the Portiuncula
(1C 8, 18, 21).
 
1208: At 27, Francis hears the Gospel at the newly rebuilt Portiuncula
on the feast of St Matthias (February 24). He asks the priest to
explain the Gospel to him (1C 22). When Francis hears that Christ's
disciples should not have possessions but should preach God's kingdom
and penance, he decides to live as a mendicant disciple of Christ by
following the Gospel to the letter. Thereafter he begins his itinerant
preaching throughout Umbria, which soon attracts his first companions
(1C 23-25). Francis designs a habit to be worn by his new mendicant
brothers, and they begin to preach outside Umbria (1C 29-30).
 
1209: In the spring, the first twelve brothers present the Pope their
"form of life" that Francis had written (1C 32-33). Pope Innocent
III verbally approves it, and the companions begin calling themselves
'lesser brothers' (1C 38). During this time, Francis begins to write
"The Earlier Rule."
 
1210: Clare likely hears Francis preach at the church of San Rufino,
which was directly across from her family residence. In an effort to
avoid an arranged marriage, Clare makes arrangements to meet Francis,
who advises her to "marry Christ" instead (LSC 5).
 
1211: At 30, Francis moves from Rivo Torto to the Portiuncula after the
Benedictines present Francis with the little chapel (1C 44). Several more
men join the Order at the Portiuncula. During this period (1209-15),
Francis writes the "Earlier Exhortation to the Brothers and Sisters of
Penance" for lay men an women, single and married, who wanted to live
the gospel amongst their daily, secular concerns. This activity lays
the foundation for the establishment of the Third Order.
 
1212: On Palm Sunday, the eighteen-year-old Clare and her cousin Pacifica
receive Bishop Guido's permission to go to the Portiuncula and make their
profession to the Franciscan life (LSC 7). Francis receives them and
then escorts them to the nearby Benedictine convent. Four months later,
the first Poor Dames of the Second Order, later called Poor Clares,
move to the newly rebuilt San Damiano (1C 18-20), where Clare remains
cloistered until her death on August 11, 1253. During this period,
Francis writes a very short "form of life" for Clare and her sisters,
which Pope Innocent III approves. Later that year, inspired to preach
the gospel accompanied by a desire for martyrdom, Francis attempts to
travel to Syria, but he is shipwrecked in Dalmatia. He returns to Italy
(1C 55), where the number of brothers continues to increase (1C 57).
 
1213: At 32, Francis receives the mountain of La Verna as a gift from
the count Orlando di Chiusi on May 8, 1213. In the fall, Francis again
tries to embark on a preaching mission, now to Morocco, but illness in
Spain prevented its realization (1C 56).
 
1214: Remaining is Spain because of illness, Francis continues
preaching. While in Spain he may have visited the shrine of St James
(Santiago de Compostela) before returning to Italy in 1215 (DBF 3.1;
1C 56).
 
1215: At 34, Francis attends the Fourth Lateran Council in Rome during
November. In response to the Council's decrees, the brothers begin to
embark on the communal formation of the Franciscan Order. While in Rome,
Francis meets St Dominic (AC 49; 2C 148).
 
1216: Francis continues his itinerant preaching as he makes his way back
to Umbria to oversee the Order's growth. Cardinal Hugolino (the nephew
of Innocent III and future Pope Gregory IX) becomes a strong supporter
of Francis. He grants Francis's request for an indulgence for those
who attend Mass at San Maria degli Angeli. More pilgrims begin visiting
the Portiuncula.
 
1217: At 36, Francis is the Minister General of an expanding Order, which
holds its first General Chapter at the Portiuncula on Pentecost, May 14
(AC 108). The Chapter enacts major decisions to: organize provinces,
gather the brothers annually at Chapters, establish an obligatory
novitiate, build convents and places for study, institute a more defined
"form of life," and embark on preaching missions throughout Europe. These
changes coincide with the Order's rapid expansion. In response, Francis
likely updates "The Earlier Rule," especially the sections on provinces,
ministers and preaching. During this period (1217-21), he also writes the
"Earlier Exhortations to the Clergy" and "A Rule for Hermitages."
 
1218: The brothers implement the decrees of the Portiuncula Chapter
that extend the Order beyond Italy into Britain, France, the Holy Land,
Germany, Portugal and Spain. This rapid expansion means that most of the
novices now joining the Franciscan Order never personally met Francis. In
response to the Chapter's call for more missionary activity, Francis
tries to go to France, but Cardinal Hugolino stops him in Florence
(1C 74). Francis sees Hugolino as a supporter who can help organize
the Order, and Hugolino sees Francis and his Order as examples of
evangelical simplicity that can help inspire a Church needing reform
(1C 73-75, 99-101).
 
1219: At 38, Francis attends the General Chapter at the Portiuncula in
May. The Chapter discusses problems related to the expanding Order, but,
more importantly, it decides to send Franciscan missionaries all over
the world. Francis responds to the charge by announcing that he would
go and preach to the Saracens. Thus, Francis succeeds with his third
missionary attempt outside Europe by reaching Damietta during the fifth
crusade where he met the Sultan of Egypt, Malik-al-Kamil (1C 57). However,
his desire for martyrdom was again not fulfilled.
 
1220: Learning of the difficulties and changes facing the brotherhood
during his yearlong absence in the Holy Land (ChrJG 11-15), Francis
returns to Italy. Upon his return, Francis resigns as Minister General
in September (AC 11). His resignation may have been because of his
displeasure over the conflicts within the Order (AC 44; 2C 188),
or due to his deteriorating health, or a combination of both. Upon
his resignation, Francis appoints Peter Catanii to replace him, and
asks Pope Honorius III to name Cardinal Hugolino the protector of the
brotherhood (1C 99-101). Peter soon dies and Elias of Cortona becomes
vicar minister. During this period, Francis writes the "Later Admonition
and Exhortation to the Brothers and Sisters of Penance," the "Later
Exhortations to the Clergy," "The First Letter to the Custodians,"
"A Letter to the Rulers of the Peoples," and "The Second Letter to
the Custodians."
 
1221: The General Chapter at the Portiuncula in May rejects "The Earlier
Rule," and Francis withdraws further from governing the Order (AC 63;
2C 115). This Chapter also formally established the Franciscan Third
Order of lay brothers. Francis's illness has advanced to the point that
he has difficulty talking, seeing, and walking. He likely suffers from
conjunctivitis and malaria, which he contracted during his mission to
Egypt; he may have also suffered from leprosy that he acquired while
living with and caring for lepers at Rivo Torto. During this period,
Francis again redacts "The Earlier Rule" and writes "A Letter to a
Minister."
 
1222: At 41, Francis attends the "Chapter of Mats" in May. The
main issue was the drafting of a new version of the Rule, which was
urgently needed. At the Chapter the ministers voiced their opinions and
concerns. Francis responds by rejecting the idea of simply adopting an
existing Augustinian, Benedictine or Cistercian Rule (AC 18). Taking up
the challenge to write a New Rule, Francis retreats to Fonte Colombo
with a few close companions (AC 17). Francis main concern was for the
new Rule to state clearly that the brothers are bound to observe the
gospel of Jesus Christ. To emphasize this, "The Later Rule" begins
(LR 1.1) and ends (LR 12.4) with admonitions to the brothers to live
the gospel of Jesus Christ. When Francis finished "The Later Rule", he
personally delivered it to Cardinal Hugolino in the spring of 1223 to
ask his advice. After Hugolino edits the text, they submit a draft to
Pope Honorius III. Francis likely wrote "True and Perfect Joy" sometime
during this challenging period (1220-22).
 
1223: Pope Honorius III confirms the canonical Rule for the Order of
Lesser Brothers on November 29 (LMj 4.11). The shorter "Later Rule"
is written in more ecclesiastical and juridical language. After the
stress of writing the "Second Rule," Francis retreats to Greccio and
celebrates Christmas by creating the first nativity scene where he
reenacts Christ's birth (1C 84-87). During this period, Francis writes
"A Letter to Brother Anthony of Padua."
 
1224: At 43, exhausted by the Order's struggles and chronic illness,
Francis travels to La Verna with some of his closest companions for a
forty day fast lasting from the feast of the Assumption (August 15) to
the feast of Saint Michael the Archangel (September 29). During the fast,
Francis receives the stigmata (1C 94-96), which tradition reports happened
on the feast of the exaltation of the cross on September 14. During this
period, Francis writes "The Praises of God."
 
1225: Francis's health deteriorates further (1C 97-98, 105-07). He
convalesces at San Damiano where he receives multiple medical
treatments including cauterization for his ophthalmitis (AC 83). While
at San Damiano, severe spiritual desolation accompanies his physical
ailments (AC 83). During his stay, Francis writes "The Canticle of the
Creatures." Later he adds the verses on forgiveness and peace (stanzas
10-11) in the aftermath of a quarrel between the podestà and bishop of
Assisi, which Francis helped settle (AC 84). At this time, Francis also
writes "The Canticle of Exhortation for the Ladies of San Damiano" and
"A Letter to Brother Leo."
 
1226: At 45, Francis dies on October 3 at the Portiuncula (1C 109-11). He
is buried at the church of San Giorgio (1C 118). As his death neared,
Francis redacts his "Testament" (AC 23, 56, 59, 106) and adds the
verses about death (stanzas 12-13) to "The Canticle of the Creatures"
(AC 7). Shortly before his death, Francis also writes "A Letter to the
Entire Order."
 
1228: Pope Gregory IX, Francis's former confidant Cardinal Hugolino,
canonizes Francis on July 16 (1C 123-26). The next day, Gregory lays
the first stone in the construction of the lower church (L3C 72). During
this time, Gregory also commissions Thomas of Celano to write an official
hagiography of St Francis.
 
1230: Translation of St Francis's body from San Giorgio to the crypt of
the newly completed church built in his honor (LMj 15.8).
 
Undated Writings: Although some of Francis's undated writings offer clues
as to when they were written, they remain difficult to date because
he wrote most of them over extended periods of time as he prayed
and contemplated the Gospel life he lived. These writings include:
"The Admonitions," "Exhortation to the Praise of God," "The Office of
the Passion," "A Prayer Inspired by the Our Father," "The Praises to be
Said at All the Hours," "A Salutation of the Blessed Virgin Mary," and
"A Salutation of the Virtues."
 
Abbreviations
 
1C: The Life of Saint Francis by Thomas of Celano
2C: The Remembrance of the Desire of a Soul by Thomas of Celano
L3C: The Legend of the Three Companions
AC: The Assisi Compilation
LMj: The Major Legend by Bonaventure
DBF: The Deeds of Blessed Francis and His Companions
ChrJG: The Chronicle of Jordan of Giano
LSC: The Legend of Saint Clare
 