The Dream of Innocent III
 
Sixth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
In a dream Pope Innocent III saw the Lateran Basilica about to collapse,
but Francis, a poor man of humble stature, put his shoulders to the
building to prevent it from falling into ruin. The depicted event occurred
in the spring of 1209.
 
The Pope, in his long robe, sleeps on his bed in a richly decorated alcove
that takes up the right side of the scene. The curtain that delimits
the alcove in the foreground is lifted up leftwards and wrapped around
a column. At the base of the bed, two servants sit on the ground facing
each other. The one on the left looks towards the figure of the Pope. He
gazes at him carefully, as if his face mirrored the events occurring in
the Pope’s dream, which is represented on the scene’s left side, outside
the alcove. Here the Pope sees a habit clad Francis supporting, with his
right hand and shoulder, the church, which is falling down. The church is
a colonnaded basilica with a multi-storied bell tower. Its style mimics
the Lateran Basilica in Rome, which is the cathedral church in Rome,
and thus, a symbol of the Church in general.
 
Within the context of the bay, the “fruits of conversion” sequence
culminates with Francis facing back left for the second time as he
fixes his gaze upon God’s blessing hand in the previous scene. Here
Francis fulfills, in the Pope’s dream, the call of Christ at San Damiano
to “repair my house.” The scene also shows that just as God brought
Eve forth from Adam (upper register), Francis’s reconstituted life
rebuilds the Church, i.e., the new Eve, brought forth from the new Adam,
Christ. Like the last bay (Francis’s dream), the sequence of fresco’s
in this bay also ends with a dream (Pope’s dream).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 3.9-10
 
When he arrived at the Roman Curia and was brought into the presence
of the Supreme Pontiff, he explained his proposal, humbly and urgently
imploring him to approve that rule of life. The Vicar of Christ, the Lord
Innocent III, a man thoroughly brilliant with wisdom, admiring in the man
of God remarkable purity and simplicity of heart, firmness of purpose,
and fiery ardor of will, gave his assent to the pious request. Yet he
hesitated to do what Christ’s little poor man asked because it seemed to
some of the cardinals to be something novel and difficult beyond human
powers. Among the cardinals there was a most venerable man, the lord John
of St Paul, Bishop of Sabina, a lover of holiness, and helper of Christ’s
poor. Inspired by the Holy Spirit, he said to the Supreme Pontiff and his
brother cardinals: “If we refuse the request of this poor man as novel
or too difficult, when all he asks is to be allowed to lead the Gospel
life, we must be on our guard lest we commit an offense against Christ’s
Gospel. For if anyone says that there is something novel or irrational
or impossible to observe in this man’s desire to live according to
the perfection of the Gospel, he would be guilty of blasphemy against
Christ, the author of the Gospel.” At this observation, the successor
of the Apostle Peter turned to the poor man of Christ and said: “My son,
pray to Christ that through you He may show us His will, so that once we
know it with more certainty, we may confidently approve your holy desire.”
 
The servant of Almighty God, giving himself totally to prayer, obtained
through his devout prayers both what he should say outwardly and what
the pope should hear inwardly. For when he told a parable, as he had
accepted it from God, about a rich king who gladly betrothed a poor but
lovely woman who bore him children with the king’s likeness, and, for
this reason were fed at his table, he added his own interpretation. “The
sons and heirs of the eternal King should not fear that they will die
of hunger. They have been born of a poor mother by the power of the Holy
Spirit in the image of Christ the King, and they will be begotten by the
spirit of poverty in our poor little religion. For if the King of heaven
promises his followers an eternal kingdom, he will certainly supply
them with those things that he gives to the good and the bad alike.”
While the Vicar of Christ listened attentively to this parable and its
interpretation, he was quite amazed and recognized without a doubt that
Christ had spoken in this man. But he also confirmed a vision he had
recently received from heaven, that, as the Divine Spirit indicated,
would be fulfilled in this man. He saw in a dream, as he recounted,
the Lateran basilica almost ready to fall down. A little poor man,
small and scorned, was propping it up with his own back bent so that
it would not fall. “I’m sure,” he said “he is the one who will hold up
Christ’s Church by what he does and what he teaches.” Because of this,
filled with exceptional devotion, he bowed to the request in everything
and always loved Christ’s servant with special love. Then he granted
what was asked and promised even more. He approved the rule, gave them a
mandate to preach penance, and had small tonsures given to all the lay
brothers, who were accompanying the servant of God, so that they could
freely preach the word of God. (1C 32-33, LJS 21, 2C 16-17)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 547-49.