The Vision of the Heavenly Thrones
 
Ninth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
In a vision, a friar saw many thrones in heaven with one that was more
glorious and resplendent than the others. He heard a voice that said:
“This throne belonged to one of the angels cast out of paradise; now it
is reserved for the humble Francis.” The depicted event occurred sometime
during 1211 and 1215.
 
On the right of the fresco, a church is just sketched. Under an apse
with a projecting roof there stands a case-shaped altar, whose only
ornament is a cross standing upon it. Above the altar, a chandelier
containing a few oil lamps is suspended; the basket is hanging from a
piece of cord stretched on a cylindrical roller, which allows it to be
lowered to light the lamps.
 
On the altar’s lowest step, Francis kneels in humble prayer as he
beats his breast. In the left corner, a kneeling friar is absorbed in
a vision. His eyes and hands are turned towards the angel who hovers
over Francis. High up, four seats and a throne are lined up; the central
throne is richly adorned and open in all directions with each side having
a back. The connection between Francis and the throne is made by the
angel whose eyes look at the kneeling friar, whose his left hand points
to the throne situated above Francis, and whose his right hand points
to the humble Francis who is destined for the heavenly throne.
 
Within the context of the bay, this last scene of “the founding of the
Order” again contrasts Francis with Adam and Eve whom the angel drives
from Paradise (upper register). Whereas one angel expels Adam and Eve,
another angel offers Francis a heavenly throne, signifying that he
receives God’s favor. The throne the angel shows Francis is the throne
that “belonged to one of those who fell.” Satan and his angels lost
their heavenly thrones because of their pride, whereas Francis is awarded
the vacant throne because of his humility. In relation to the previous
two scenes, this last scene depicts the fruit of living the Rule, i.e.,
heavenly reward.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 6.6
 
And because he preferred humility to honor both in himself and in
all his subjects, God, the lover of the humble, judged him worthy of
higher honors as a heavenly vision revealed to one brother, a man of
outstanding virtue and devotion. For when he was in the company of the
man of God and was praying fervently with him in a deserted church, he
passed into ecstasy, and saw among the many thrones in heaven one more
noble than the rest, adorned with precious stones and glittering with
great glory. He wondered within himself at the splendor of the lofty
throne, and thought quietly about whose it might be. Then he heard a
voice saying to him: “This throne belonged to one of those who fell,
and now it is reserved for the humble Francis.” Finally, when the brother
came back to himself from the flight of prayer, he followed the blessed
man as he proceeded to act in his usual manner. As they went along the
road, talking to one another about God, that brother, not unmindful of
his vision, skillfully asked him what he thought of himself. The humble
servant of Christ said to him: “I see myself as the greatest of sinners.”
When the brother said, to the contrary, that he could neither say nor
feel this with a good conscience, [Francis] continued: “If Christ had
pursued so great a criminal with such mercy, I surely think he would be
much more grateful to God than I.” At hearing such remarkable humility,
the brother was convinced of the truth of the vision, knowing from the
sacred testimony of the Gospel that the truly humble will be exalted to
the height of glory from which the proud have been cast out. (2C 122-23)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 573.