Mary’s Nativity and Betrothal
 
Third and Fourth Scene in the Upper Life of the Virgin Cycle
 
Cimabue Workshop (c. 1277-80)
 
Golden Legend 131
 
Framed by a lunette, the bifurcated fresco depicts two scenes. The
top scene shows Mary’s birth, which the Golden Legend mentions only in
passing: “Anna conceived and brought forth a daughter, and they called
her name Mary.” Accompanied by a haloed midwife, Anna is sitting up in
a bed in front of a curtain backdrop. Below the bed, just beneath the
destruction that cuts across the fresco, one can see Mary’s two legs
and swaddled body. In the lower left corner, a group of women witness
Anna’s delivery from afar. A seated woman reaches out to “hold” Mary
who appears to be falling from the bed.
 
The bottom scene depicts the wedding of Mary to Joseph. Behind Mary
and Joseph, Mary’s suitors hold the branches they brought in the hope
of winning Mary as their bride as described in the Golden Legend:
“Each unmarried but marriageable man of the house of David is to bring
a branch to the altar. One of these branches will bloom and the Holy
Spirit in the form of a dove will perch upon its tip, according to the
prophecy of Isaiah.” In the scene’s center, Mary and Joseph look at each
other. Joseph holds his flowering branch: “Joseph brought his branch
forward, it flowered at once, and a dove came from heaven and perched
upon it.” To the right, over the doorway, is a representation of the
Temple and altar inside signifying that Mary has left her enclosure in
the Temple to marry Joseph.
 
The fresco’s chronological sequence moves from the bottom parallel fresco
across the apse upwards to the top fresco in the lunette, across the
apse to the upper fresco in this lunette, and then down to the fresco
underneath.
 
The upper fresco suffers significant damage that spans the scene from
left to right. Unfortunately this damage has removed most of the infant
Mary and the figure that likely holds her. The lower fresco is in much
better condition and is mostly intact. However, the oxidation of the
paint’s white lead has further obscured the scene by making both frescos
appear as a “negative” image.
 
Golden Legend: The Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Ryan, vol. 2, p. 153)