The Crucifixion 
 
Third Scene in the Passion and Glory of Christ Cycle
 
Cimabue Workshop (c. 1277-80)
 
Matthew 27:33-54; Mark 15:22-39; Luke 23:32-48; John 19:16-37
 
The scene’s center depicts Christ’s crucifixion, which spans the fresco
from top to bottom. Having passed, Christ’s head with closed eyes falls
upon his chest. He is flanked by eleven angels, who express affliction
and lament (another angel is likely missing in the upper right destroyed
area). Three angels collect the blood that spills from Christ’s hands
and side wound.
 
The angel that collects the blood from the side wound looks toward a
crowd to the left of Christ in a manner that expresses that He sheds
His blood for them. In front of the crowd stand six haloed personages:
a woman, likely Mary Magdalene, who reaches up to Christ, John and Mary
who hold hands, and three more women who console each other.
 
To the immediate right of Christ, another angel looks back toward the
exclusively male crowd that executed Christ. However, the haloed figure
is the centurion St Longinus, who exclaims: “Truly this man was God’s
Son!” (Mk 15:39). Another man reaches his hand out toward Christ. The
faint red stripes in the centurion’s cape hint at the fresco’s former
glory. Following the cycle’s order, the slight differences between the
two crucifixion scenes reflect the chronological progression of the
event as told in the gospel of John.
 
At the foot of the cross there is the tomb and remains of Adam, which
symbolizes the death caused by Adam’s sin. There also is the kneeling
Francis who prays to his Crucified savior, Whose death overcomes
Adam’s. Unfortunately, Francis’s face is missing.
 
Many wonder why the transept contains two massive crucifixion scenes. A
simple answer is that they are for the Franciscan Brothers who occupy
both transepts as they pray the liturgy of the hours. Thus, as they
sing the office, the two scenes allow all the Brothers to contemplate
Christ’s Crucifixion. A side altar accompanies each Crucifixion scene.
 
This structurally well-preserved fresco only suffers some damage in
the upper right corner, the area over Christ’s head, and the area below
Mary. However, the oxidation of the paint’s white lead has obscured the
fresco by making the figures appear as “negative” images.