The Vision of the Fiery Chariot
 
Eighth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
One day Francis was praying in a hut near the Bishop’s residence in
Assisi, his brothers who were in Rivotorto, quite a distance away,
saw Francis in a bright fiery chariot moving around at the place about
midnight. The depicted event occurred sometime during 1211 and 1215.
 
In a small niche, four followers of Francis, partly asleep and partly
awake, are sitting on the ground. The place is so small that it cannot
contain four lying persons. Outside the niche, there are three other
brothers whose gestures express great excitement. One of them turns
toward his brothers inside the niche and, stretching out his left arm
towards them, he points upwards to the vision with his right arm. While
he is trying to wake up those still asleep, the two brothers at his back
animatedly dwell upon the vision. The figure on the far right raises his
eyes straight towards the apparition as his companion raises his right
hand in the same direction.
 
High up, where the friars’ looks and pointing converge, appears a red
two-wheeled chariot drawn by two red horses. Francis, surrounded by a
red aura of rays, is standing in the chariot. He is born aloft in ardent
prayer, which is symbolized by the chariot, clasped hands, and intense
gaze upward.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second scene of “the founding
of the Order” depicts Francis as a new Elijah, come to prepare the
world for heavily glory. It contrasts Francis’s ecstatic contemplation
with Adam and Eve’s toiling in the fruits of wrath (upper register,
lost). Furthermore, it suggests that while the ecclesiastical founding
of the Franciscan Order was with the approval of the Rule (scene to
left), the spiritual foundation of the Order depends on the brothers’
contemplation, in imitation their spiritual father, Francis. In effect,
the Rule defines the principles, but contemplation ensures their practice.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 4.4
 
While the brothers were still staying in the place already mentioned,
one Saturday the holy man entered the city of Assisi to preach in the
cathedral on Sunday morning, as was his custom. In a hut situated in the
garden of the canons, away from his sons in body, the man devoted to
God spent the night in his customary way, in the prayer of God. About
midnight, while some of the brothers were resting and others were
persevering in prayer, behold, a fiery chariot of wonderful brilliance
entering the door of the house moved here and there through the little
house three times. On top of it sat a bright globe that looked like
the sun, and it made the night bright as day. Those who were awake were
dumbfounded, while those sleeping were disturbed and, at the same time,
terrified; they sensed the brightness with their hearts as much as with
their bodies, while the conscience of each was laid bare to the others
by the power of that marvelous light. As they looked into each other’s
hearts, they all understood together that the holy father, while away
from them in body, was present in spirit transfigured in such an image
radiant with heavenly brilliance and inflamed with burning ardor in a
glowing chariot of fire, as the Lord had shown him to them that they
might follow him as true Israelites. Like a second Elijah, God had made
him a chariot and charioteer for spiritual men. Certainly we can believe
that He opened the eyes of these simple men at the prayers of Francis
that they might see the wonders of God just as he had once opened the
eyes of a child to see the mountain full of horses and chariots of
fire round about Elijah. When the holy man returned to the brothers,
he began to probe the secrets of their consciences, to draw courage
for them from this wonderful vision and to make many predictions about
the growth of the Order. When he disclosed many things that transcended
human understanding, the brothers completely realized the Spirit of the
Lord had come to rest upon him in such fullness that it was absolutely
safe for them to follow his life and teaching. (1C 47-48, LJS 29)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 551-52.