The Confession of the Woman Restored to Life
 
Twenty-Seventh Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
A woman had died with an unconfessed sin on her soul. St Francis restored
her to life. In the presence of the clergy and others she went to
confession, and thereafter died peacefully in the Lord, to the confusion
of the devil. The depicted event occurred sometime during 1226 and 1228.
 
Like the previous fresco, there is the representation of a room’s interior
subdivided by slender columns, which allow the viewer to see in. In the
middle of the room there stands a bed with a few women and children at its
head and a group of clergymen at the other end. The first two clergymen
are wearing a surplice; one of them is holding a large candle and the
other holds a large cross. The priest behind them holds the Psalter. The
presence of the clergy indicates that the fresco depicts the woman’s
funeral rites, which constitutes the background for the central scene:
a dead woman rises from her bed to confesses her sins to a priest.
 
The sin, depicted like a winged devil, flies away from the two central
figures. The angel of death, sneering at the devil, descends toward the
woman, ready to receive her and take her to heaven. In the upper left
corner, St Francis kneels in front of Jesus in the act of fervent prayer
as he intercedes for the woman. In response, Christ grants Francis’s
request and raises the woman from the dead so she can confess her sin,
be absolved, and die in a state of grace.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second  “miracle” scene demonstrates
that Francis’s miraculous raising of the dead parallels Christ’s miracle
of raising Lazarus (middle register). Moreover, like the Annunciation,
this miracle announces the Good News of God’s Kingdom, and like the
Visitation, they rejoice in the salvation offered by Jesus who fulfills
God’s promises (upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis: The Miracles 2.1
 
There was a woman in Monte Marano near Benevento who clung to
Saint Francis with special devotion, and she went the way of all
flesh. The clergy came at night with their psalters to sing the wake
and vigils. Suddenly, in the sight of all, the woman sat up in bed and
called to one of them, a priest who was her godfather, “I want to confess,
Father, hear my sin! I have indeed died, and was destined for a harsh
prison because I had never confessed the sin I will reveal to you. But
Saint Francis prayed for me as I served him with a devout spirit while I
was alive. I have now been permitted to return to my body so that after
confessing my sin I might merit eternal life. So now, as all of you watch,
after I reveal that to you I will hurry off to my promised rest.” She then
shakily confessed to the shaken priest, and after receiving absolution,
composed herself peacefully on the bed and happily fell asleep in the
Lord. (3C 40)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 655-56.