Francis Appears at the Chapter of Arles as St Anthony of Padua Preaches
 
Eighteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
While St Anthony of Padua was preaching about the Cross to the brothers
gathered for Chapter in Arles, France, Francis appeared, extended his
hands and blessed the brothers. The depicted event occurred in May 1224.
 
The scene occurs in a beautiful Gothic hall. Its two windows and
central door allow a view onto a covered cloister, which is supported by
columns. The main figure is Saint Francis who appears in the door as he
blesses the brothers. No one except Monaldo, the friar in the lower left
corner, sees the imposing figure of Francis whose hands stretch out to
form a cross. To Monaldo, Francis appears as an image of the Crucified
Christ. Thus, just as the risen Christ appeared to his apostles, Francis
appears to his brothers.
 
Saint Anthony stands on a podium as he preaches; his hands are hidden
within the wide sleeves of his robe. The many listening brothers are
gathered in the hall. They are painted frontally, sideways and showing
their backs; together, with the view through the door and the windows,
they give the scene a gradual depth.
 
Within the context of the bay, this third “preaching scene” connects
Francis with Christ’s death and resurrection (middle register). As Anthony
preaches, Francis appears “as if on a cross.” His extended arms point
to the two scenes above, which highlights Francis’s conformity with the
Crucified and Risen Christ. By pointing to the frescoes above, this scene
teaches that the death and resurrection of Christ must be understood
together, each informing the other, i.e., the death that leads to life,
and the life that overcomes death (Rom 6:4-9; 1 Cor 15:51-55). In the
next scene, Francis’s cruciform pose gives way to the reception of the
stigmata itself.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 4.10
 
With the passing of time when the number of brothers had increased,
the watchful shepherd began to summon them to a general chapter at
Saint Mary of the Portiuncula to allot to each a portion of obedience
in the land of their poverty, according to the measuring cord of divine
distribution. Although there was a complete lack of all necessities
and sometimes the number of the brothers was more than five thousand,
nevertheless with the assistance of divine mercy, they had adequate food,
enjoyed physical health and overflowed with spiritual joy. Because he
could not be physically present at the provincial chapters, he was
present in spirit through his solicitous care for governing, fervor
of prayer, and effectiveness of blessing, although, he did sometimes
appear visibly by God’s wonderful power. For the outstanding preacher,
who is now a glorious confessor of Christ, Anthony, was preaching to
the brothers at the chapter of Arles on the inscription on the cross:
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. As he glanced at the door of the
chapter, a brother of proven virtue, Monaldo by name, moved by a divine
reminder, saw with his bodily eyes blessed Francis lifted up in the air
with his arms extended as if on a cross, blessing the brothers. All
the brothers felt themselves filled with a consolation of spirit, so
great and so unusual, that it was certain to them that the Spirit was
bearing witness to the true presence of the holy father among them. This
was later confirmed not only by the evidence of signs, but also by the
external testimony of the words of the holy father himself. It must be
clearly believed that the almighty power of God, which allowed the holy
bishop Ambrose to attend the burial of the glorious Saint Martin and to
honor that holy prelate with his holy presence, also allowed his servant
Francis to be present at the preaching of his true herald Anthony, in
order to attest to the truth of his words, especially those concerning
Christ’s cross, of which he was both a carrier and a minister. (1C 48)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 557.