The Vaults
 
The eight cross vaults, divided by painted ribbing (see figures 1-3:
the nave has four vaults, the transept three, and the apse one), contain
three fresco cycles and one decorative theme. Two of the cycles, the
Four Doctors and the Four Intercessors, are in the nave, while the Four
Evangelists occupy the vault over the presbytery in the transept. The
other five vaults all depict the starry firmament.
 
1. THE FOUR EVANGELISTS
 
A winged lion, the symbol for Mark, resides at the base of Mark's desk as
he writes his gospel in Italy. A winged ox, the symbol for Luke, resides
at the base of Luke's desk as he writes his gospel in Greece. An eagle,
the symbol for John, resides at John's left foot as he writes his gospel
in Asia Minor. A winged human, the symbol for Matthew, resides at the
base of Matthew's desk as he writes his gospel in Judea (destroyed by
the 1997 earthquake). All the evangelists have an angel reaching toward
their ears signifying that their gospels were inspired. Cimabue's workshop
completed this vault between 1277-80.
 
2. THE FOUR INTERCESSORS
 
Jesus holds a scroll, i.e., the Book of Life, in his left hand and offers
benediction with his right. The three other figures in the vault all
point to Him, signifying that they convey the prayers of the faithful
to Christ who reconciles all tings to the Father. The inscription
around Jesus reads, 'Jesus Christ King of Glory.' Mary gestures with
her hands toward her Son Jesus. The inscription around her reads, 'Holy
Mary Mother of God Pray for Us.' John points to Christ with his right
hand. The inscription around him reads, 'Saint John the Baptist Pray for
Us.' With both hands, Francis gestures toward Mary, who in turn gestures
toward Jesus. The inscription around Francis reads, 'Pray for Us Saint
Francis.' The Franciscan Jacopo Torriti and his workshop completed this
vault between 1288-90.
 
3. THE FOUR DOCTORS
 
Sts Ambrose, Augustine and Gregory the Great all instruct a prelate
while St Jerome instructs a monk, which signifies that the four doctors
are the leading teachers in the Church. Giotto's workshop completed this
vault around 1290.
 
The three four-figure cross-vaults connect the themes of the apse,
transept and nave according to a Franciscan interpretation of the Church's
relation to the gospel: the Evangelists in the apse and transept connect
the Church's inception with the gospel, the Doctors connect the pilgrim
or militant Church with the correct teaching of the gospel, and in the
center, the Intercessors connect the heavenly or triumphant Church with
Christ and the saints who fully and truly live the gospel. Throughout,
the gospel message of salvation dominates. In short, Christ is the
author of the gospel, and the Church, the community of the gospel,
is comprised of all the iconographic decoration below: Mary, Francis,
patriarchs, apostles, angels, saints, and most importantly the pilgrim
who enters the sacred space and therefore becomes a participant in the
story of Christ's Body.
