Innocent III Confirms the Rule
 
Seventh Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Pope Innocent III approved Francis’s Rule and gave the friars the mission
to preach penance. He also granted them permission to wear the tonsure
so that they might preach God’s word. The depicted event occurred in
the spring of 1209.
 
In a square hall, framed at the top by a gallery of round arches,
supported by corbels, several people are gathered. At the scene’s center,
Francis, now wearing a beard, is kneeling; behind him his first brothers
also kneel. The twelve of them, including Francis, ask the Pope’s
permission to introduce their new Rule into the Church.
 
The Pope is sitting on a high throne. The scene fixes the moment when the
Pope hands over to Francis the approved Rule and gives the blessing to
him and to his community. Two Bishops sit on each side of the Pope, two
more stand behind him together with two servants, who are the same as the
previous fresco. All of them witness this important moment. The Bishops,
the two servants and the eleven brothers are staring at the Pope and
Francis, which express the tense atmosphere as the Pope blesses Francis.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first scene of “the founding of the
Order” conforms with Jacob’s reception of the birthright blessing from
Isaac (middle register), which is emphasized by the twelve friars that
correspond to Israel’s twelve tribes descended from Jacob. Moreover,
Francis’s line of sight passes through the Pope to the scene of Esau
before Isaac, which suggests that just as Jacob unexpectedly received
Isaac’s blessing instead of Esau, the poor and humble friars receive
the Pope’s blessing instead of more traditional forms of religious life,
as might have been expected.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 3.9
 
When he arrived at the Roman Curia and was brought into the presence
of the Supreme Pontiff, he explained his proposal, humbly and urgently
imploring him to approve that rule of life. The Vicar of Christ, the Lord
Innocent III, a man thoroughly brilliant with wisdom, admiring in the man
of God remarkable purity and simplicity of heart, firmness of purpose,
and fiery ardor of will, gave his assent to the pious request. Yet he
hesitated to do what Christ’s little poor man asked because it seemed
to some of the cardinals to be something novel and difficult beyond
human powers. Among the cardinals there was a most venerable man, the
lord John of St Paul, Bishop of Sabina, a lover of holiness, and helper
of Christ’s poor. Inspired by the Holy Spirit, he said to the Supreme
Pontiff and his brother cardinals: “If we refuse the request of this
poor man as novel or too difficult, when all he asks is to be allowed to
lead the Gospel life, we must be on our guard lest we commit an offense
against Christ’s Gospel. For if anyone says that there is something
novel or irrational or impossible to observe in this man’s desire to
live according to the perfection of the Gospel, he would be guilty of
blasphemy against Christ, the author of the Gospel.” At this observation,
the successor of the Apostle Peter turned to the poor man of Christ and
said: “My son, pray to Christ that through you He may show us His will,
so that once we know it with more certainty, we may confidently approve
your holy desire.” (1C 32-33, LJS 21, 2C 16-17)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 545-45.