Francis Preaches before Honorius III
 
Seventeenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Francis preached so devoutly and so efficaciously before the Pope and
the Cardinals that it was clear to all that he did not speak with the
learned words of human wisdom but by divine inspiration. The depicted
event occurred in 1220.
 
In a Gothic hall the Pope is represented sitting on the throne and turned
leftwards. On his right and left sit three cardinals each. Everyone is
listening to words of Francis, who stands on the left. His right hand
seems to point at something behind him beyond the viewer’s sight, possibly
back to the scene of the knight’s death, which subtly suggests that the
Pope too must put his affairs in order. The Pope, with his face leaning
on his hand, looks intently as if pondering the mystery of Francis’s
wisdom and sanctity. This impression is clearly shown in the distinctive
movements and expressions of the six cardinals and in the intense
meditation of Francis’s companion sitting on the ground. The scene’s
realism invites the viewer to “hear” the words pronounced by Francis.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second “preaching scene” stresses that
Francis’s teaching authority, like Christ’s, comes from the Holy Spirit,
which Francis’s gesture indicates. Although Francis’s gesture points
back to the previous scene, it most likely passes beyond that scene to
the very source of his teaching, the grace of the Holy Spirit offered a
Pentecost and received by Francis as he preaches before the Pope. Thus,
it was not Francis, “but the Spirit of the Lord who was speaking.”

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 12.7
 
The Spirit of the Lord, who had anointed and sent him, and also Christ,
the power and the wisdom of God, were with their servant Francis wherever
he went so that he might abound with words of sound teaching and shine
with miracles of great power. For his word was like a blazing fire,
reaching the deepest parts of the heart, and filling the souls of all with
wonder, since it made no pretense at the elegance of human composition,
but exuded the breath of divine revelation. Once when he was to preach
before the pope and cardinals at the suggestion of the lord of Ostia,
he memorized a sermon, which he had carefully composed. When he stood in
their midst to offer his edifying words, he went completely blank and was
unable to say anything at all. This he admitted to them in true humility
and directed himself to invoke the grace of the Holy Spirit. Suddenly he
began to overflow with such effective eloquence and to move the minds of
those high-ranking men to compunction with such force and power that it
was clearly evident it was not he, but the Spirit of the Lord who was
speaking (1C 23, 1C 73)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 625-26.