The Canonization of St Francis
 
Twenty-Fourth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Pope Gregory IX personally came to Assisi for Francis’s canonization,
which was celebrated in the Piazza in Assisi. After the miracles were
duly examined, and on the basis of the friars’ testimony, he canonized
Francis and enrolled him in the calendar of the saints. The depicted
event occurred on July 16, 1228.
 
At the center foreground, there is a caisson-shaped altar, wrapped
with a piece of cloth decorated with eagle-like patterns. A white cloth
covers the altar. In front of the altar a shelf bears a few lit candles,
and behind the shelf a child is lying down. The girl is likely sick, and
awaits a miraculous healing associated with Francis’s canonization. All
around the altar, there gathers the crowd of men, women with children,
and friars. In the right foreground, many women are sitting and some
of them hold babies. In the right background, three Bishops and one
monk sit on higher seats. Two of the Bishops and the group of people
standing behind them intensely fix their sight on a point high up where,
unfortunately, the fresco is thoroughly destroyed. Likely, in the upper
left, there had been the representation of the pulpit from where the
Pope had proclaimed Francis’s canonization.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second “canonization” scene also
indicates that those who venerate Francis are like the wise men who
honor Christ and the Holy Family who humbly receive Christ (upper
register). This fresco formally declares what has been obvious in the
preceding scenes:  Francis’s conformity with Christ.
 
This is the only fresco in the Francis cycle that contains significant
damage.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 15.7
 
That shepherd of the Church was fully convinced of Francis’s remarkable
holiness: not only from hearing of the miracles after his death, but
also from his own experience during his life. Having seen with his own
eyes and touched with his own hands, he had no doubt that Francis was
glorified in heaven by the Lord. In order to act in conformity with
Christ, whose vicar he was, after prayerful consideration he decided
to glorify him on earth by proclaiming him worthy of all veneration. In
order to certify to the whole world the glorification of this most holy
man, he had the known miracles recorded and attested to by appropriate
witness. These he submitted to the examination of those cardinals who
seemed less favorable to his cause. This material was examined carefully
and approved by all. He decreed, with the unanimous advice and assent
of his brothers and of all the prelates who were then in the curia,
that he should be canonized. He came personally to the city of Assisi in
the one thousandth, two hundredth, twenty-eighth year of the Incarnation
of the Lord, on the seventeenth day of the calends of August, a Sunday,
and enrolled the blessed father in the catalog of the saints, in a great
and solemn ceremony that would be too long to describe. (1C 121, 1C 124,
1C 126, LJS 74)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 648.