The Ordeal by Fire before the Sultan
 
Eleventh Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
In testimony to the truth of the faith of Christ, Francis challenged the
clerics of Malik-al-Kamil, the Sultan of Babylonia (actually modern day
Egypt) to walk through the fire with him. But none of them were willing to
accept the challenge. The depicted event occurred in the summer of 1219.
 
Francis stands at the center of the scene with his companion Illuminato
at his back. Francis is slightly turned towards the Sultan to whom he
preaches; with his right hand he points at the fire while Illuminato looks
at the Muslim clerics to the left. The Sultan is sitting on a gabled
throne, holding a scepter as a symbol of his power. The throne’s base
details ornate golden lions, which further signify his authority. The
Sultan is wearing a white tunic, a red mantle, and a blue turban with
gold crown. Behind the throne there is a group of four soldiers.
 
On the left, against the background, there is a strange building; its
upper part is made of a loggia supported by four marble pillars. On the
farthest left there are four Muslim clerics. As the Sultan looks at his
clerics and points to the fire, the “elder” cleric gives a last glance
at Francis and the burning fire as he pushes his companions with his
hand to hurry them away. The fire is burning between the four clerics
and Francis. His gesture and confident look express that he is ready to
undergo the ordeal by fire. In contrast, one can see fear in the eyes
of the clerics and the stunned look of the Sultan, who watches as his
clerics leave.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second “peace scene” of Francis’s
peaceful encounter with the Sultan compares with Joseph’s restoration
of peace among his brothers (middle register). The fresco echoes back to
Francis’s Earlier Rule: “live spiritually among the Saracens. . .do not
engage in arguments or disputes but be subject to every human creature
for God’s sake” (ER 16.5). It illustrates, in contrast to Cain’s violence
(upper register), that imitation of Christ is a way of peace. It also
contrasts with the scene of Cain and Able offering their gifts to God
(upper register, lost). Whereas Cain’s offering is followed by resentment,
envy and anger that leads to Abel’s murder, Francis peacefully, humbly and
faithfully offers himself as the holocaust, thereby conforming himself
to Christ. In offering himself before the Sultan, Francis attempts to
reconcile with his “brother” just as Joseph reconciled with his brothers
(middle register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 9.8
 
Taking a companion with him, a brother named Illuminato, a virtuous
and enlightened man, after he had begun his journey, he came upon
two lambs. Overjoyed to see them, the holy man said to his companion:
“Trust in the Lord, brother, for the Gospel text is being fulfilled in
us: Behold, I am sending you forth like sheep in the midst of wolves.”
When they proceeded farther, the Saracen sentries fell upon them like
wolves swiftly overtaking sheep, savagely seizing the servants of God,
and cruelly and contemptuously dragging them away, treating them with
insults, beating them with whips, and putting them in chains. Finally,
after they had been maltreated in many ways and were exhausted, by
divine providence they were led to the Sultan, just as the man of God
wished. When that ruler inquired by whom, why, and how they had been
sent and how they got there, Christ’s servant, Francis, answered with
an intrepid heart that he had been sent not by man but by the Most High
God in order to point out to him and his people the way of salvation and
to announce the Gospel of truth. He preached to the Sultan the Triune
God and the one Savior of all, Jesus Christ, with such great firmness,
such strength of soul, and such fervor of spirit that the words of the
Gospel appeared to be truly fulfilled in him: I will give you utterance
and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to resist or answer
back. For the Sultan, perceiving in the man of God a fervor of spirit and
a courage that had to be admired, willingly listened to him and invited
him to stay longer with him. Inspired from heaven, Christ’s servant
said: “If you wish to be converted to Christ along with your people, I
will most gladly stay with you for love of him. But if you hesitate to
abandon the law of Mohammed for the faith of Christ, then command that
an enormous fire be lit and I will walk into the fire along with your
priests so that you will recognize which faith deserves to be held as
the holier and more certain.” “I do not believe,” the Sultan replied,
“that any of my priests would be willing to expose himself to the fire
to defend his faith or to undergo any kind of torment.” For he had
seen immediately one of his priests, a man full of authority and years,
slipping away from his view when he heard Francis’s words. “If you wish
to promise me that if I come out of the fire unharmed,” the saint said
to the Sultan, “you and your people will come over to the worship of
Christ, then I will enter the fire alone. And if I shall be burned,
you must attribute it to my sins. But if God’s power protects me, you
will acknowledge Christ the power and wisdom of God as the true God and
the Savior of all.” The Sultan replied that he did not dare to accept
this choice because he feared a revolt among his people. Nevertheless
he offered him many precious gifts, which the man of God, greedy not for
worldly possessions but the salvation of souls, spurned as if they were
dirt. Seeing that the holy man so completely despised worldly possessions,
the Sultan was overflowing with admiration, and developed an even greater
respect for him. Although he refused, or perhaps did not dare, to come
over to the Christian faith, he nevertheless devoutly asked Christ’s
servant to accept the gifts and give them to the Christian poor or to
churches for his salvation. But, because he was accustomed to flee the
burden of money and did not see a root of true piety in the Sultan’s soul,
Francis would in no way accept them. (1C 57, LJS 36)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 602-03.