The Nave
 
The nave contains three pictorial cycles arranged in three registers,
which form a single narrative: the Old Testament where Adam represents
the 'Old Man,' the New Testament where Christ represents the 'New Adam,'
and the Francis Cycle where Francis represents the 'New Man' conformed
to Christ. The upper two registers of the north wall contain sixteen Old
Testament frescoes that parallel the sixteen New Testament frescoes on the
upper two registers of the south wall. Both cycles begin at the transept
and run from west to east, first in the upper register and then again in
the middle register. The lower register, wrapping around the entire nave,
contains the twenty-eight frescoes of the Francis Cycle. It is doubtful
that Giotto painted this entire cycle. Rather, these frescoes, based on
Bonaventure's 'The Major Legend of Saint Francis,' were probably painted
by the 'Giotto Workshop' as they worked from Giotto's preestablished
artistic plan. The counter-façade's two registers add two more New
Testament frescoes in the upper register and two frescoes of the Francis
Cycle in the lower register. The counter-façade also has an image of
Mary with Child flanked by angels over the main door and images of Paul
(north) and Peter (south) on each side of the great rose window. The north
and south walls of the nave's four bays contain a two-light stained-glass
window topped with a small rose window. The lunette archways of the four
bays and counter-façade are covered by numerous figures. Overall there
are sixty-eight painted busts of female saints (counter-façade and first
bay, north and south wall), male saints (second bay, north and south
wall), martyr and warrior saints (third bay, north and south wall), and
prophets (fourth bay, north and south wall). None are identifiable. The
counter-façade also contains a second wider archway over the two-pillared
galleries, which contain sixteen frescoes of saints; only six are not
identifiable. While most visitors to the upper Basilica enter through
the main nave doors, the iconographic sequence of both the Old Testament
Cycle and the Francis Cycle actually begins from the transept (bay 4,
north wall) where the friars from the Sacred Convent or the pilgrims
from the lower church would enter the upper church.
 
The nave's iconographic decoration was begun during the pontificate of
Nicholas IV (1288-92), the first Franciscan elected pope. The date of
1296, which is scratched into the plaster in the gallery walkway between
the nave and north transept, may indicate its completion date because
the fresco below, 'Francis Honored by a Fellow Citizen,' was the last
fresco to be painted in the Francis Cycle. While the nave's architecture
was already planned and largely completed by Elias before his removal
as Minister General in 1239, the nave's iconographic program may have
been the genius of Matthew of Aquasparta, who was Minister General
of the Franciscan Order (1287-89) and friend to his Franciscan brother
Nicholas IV. He was made a cardinal in 1288 and died in 1302. Thus, it is
possible that he even oversaw the completion of the nave's iconographic
decorations, which may not have been completed until 1300. Regardless
of who the theological 'mastermind' of the iconographic decoration was,
the pictorial narratives of the four bays evidence a uniform program
(see descriptions of bays 1-4 below), even though they also contain
numerous technical changes, stylistic interruptions, and artistic
innovations. In terms of execution, the vaults were painted first,
then the work moved from bay to bay, starting in the third register and
working down, and from west to east (bay 4 to 1). The following provides
a thumbnail description of the 'narrative' of the iconographic decoration.
 
CREATION AND FALL OLD TESTAMENT CYCLE: UPPER REGISTER, 
NORTH WALL
 
These eight scenes convey that everything originates from the Creator
(scenes 1-3) and everything therefore is absolutely dependent on God. The
ensuing rebellion of Adam and Eve against God (scene 4) results in their
alienation from God (scenes 5-6), which devolves into the rebellion of
Cain murdering Abel (scenes 7-8). Sin has separated humans from the order
that God gave to creation. In effect, God creates cosmos while human
rebellion against God's order creates chaos. That is why the figure of
Cain, the 'destroyer' contrasts with the 'Creator' and concludes the
cycle of the primordial history of humankind.
 
THE PATRIARCHS OLD TESTAMENT CYCLE: MIDDLE REGISTER, 
NORTH WALL
 
These eight scenes contain four great models from the Old Testament:
Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph. Each span depicts two scenes from the life
of each patriarch. The relationship of these frescoes to those above
indicates that God will not allow sin to destroy creation. Instead,
God saves those who trust in God. Thus, just as Adam was the founder of
humanity in the upper register, Noah becomes the founding patriarch of
the renewed creation of the covenant after the flood (scenes 9-10), which
the other patriarchs strive to fulfill: Abraham through his ten trials and
covenant with God (scenes 11-12), Jacob through receiving Isaac's blessing
from which Israel's twelve tribes descend (scenes 13-14), and Joseph
who forgave his brothers and saved Israel during famine (scenes 15-16).
 
THE NEW ADAM NEW TESTAMENT CYCLE: UPPER REGISTER, 
SOUTH WALL
 
These eight scenes of the 'New Adam' parallel the scenes of the 'Old Adam'
and the subsequent story of the hoped fulfillment of the covenant promises
through the four patriarchs, which are realized in the 'new Adam' Jesus
Christ, who manifests the new covenant. Throughout, there are allegorical
allusions between the creation and fall and the Incarnation, but one main
message is that the miracle of the Incarnation completes God's creation.
 
JESUS' PASSION NEW TESTAMENT CYCLE: MIDDLE REGISTER, 
SOUTH WALL
 
These eight scenes teach that Jesus Christ not only completes God's
creation, but also redeems it by His Passion. Just as the patriarchs
strove for salvation through the adherence to the covenant of God's Law,
Jesus offers salvation through His unconditional obedience to His Father's
will, which reveals itself as the new covenant of God's grace sealed
in Christ's blood. Throughout, there are allegorical allusions between
the patriarchs and Christ's Passion, but one main message is that the
mystery of the crucifixion and resurrection reconciles the alienation
between God and creation. Above all, Christ's act of salvation is an
exaltation and glorification of God.
 
'ALTER CHRISTUS' FRANCIS CYCLE: LOWER REGISTER, NORTH, 
COUNTER-FAÇADE AND SOUTH WALLS
 
These frescoes comprise the most famous and most discussed pictorial
cycle in the western world. The Francis Cycle is the first European
attempt to tell the complete story of a saint's life, and it was also
the first to position such a large cycle just above eye level. The
entire cycle is based on St Bonaventure's (1217-74) 'The Major Legend
of Saint Francis,' which was the official hagiography of St Francis
at the time the frescoes were created; the captions below each fresco
were taken directly from it. The Latin term 'legenda' does not mean a
'legend' that is fictitious or historically untrue; rather, 'legenda'
comes from the Latin verb 'legere' meaning 'to read' indicating that
the text was intended to be read publicly. Moreover, a 'legenda' is not
a biography in the modern sense of a chronicle from birth to death of
the protagonist, but a theological meditation on Francis's sanctity,
which is to be emulated. Thus, the particular task of a 'legenda' is:
1) to illustrate the conformity of the Saint's life with Jesus', and
2) to inspire a person to imitate Francis so as to follow Jesus more
faithfully. In short, the 'legenda' of the Francis Cycle presents a
Franciscan interpretation of the gospel truly and totally lived. The cycle
accomplishes this in a dramatic way by the realism and familiarity of the
frescoes wherein Francis 'walks' the streets of Assisi and surrounding
Umbrian countryside, amidst its familiar locations, recognizable faces,
and everyday problems. Such realism poignantly conveys Francis's message
of evangelical salvation to the throngs of past and present pilgrims
who visit his tomb.
 
In the thirteen scenes on the north wall, segmented by the four bays
and read from west to east, Francis is analogously compared with the
Old Testament (OT) scenes in the registers above.
 
Bay 4, north: the three scenes of Francis's initial conversion and new life
(scenes 1-3) 1) parallel the new creation of Noah's covenant with God
(OT, scenes 9-10), and 2) indicate that just as God created Adam (OT,
scene 2) Francis's conversion is a product of God's work.
 
Bay 3, north: Francis's call before the crucifix, renunciation of his
father, and rebuilding of the Church (scenes 4-6) 1) corresponds with
Abraham's response to God's call by leaving his fatherland, which
engenders a covenant with God (OT, scenes 11-12); specifically, just
as the divine spoke to Abraham through the angels (OT, scene 12), the
divine also spoke to Francis via the crucifix at San Damiano, and just as
Abraham nearly sacrificed Isaac to follow God's will (OT, scene, 13)
Francis renounces everything to obey God. 2) The bay also shows that,
in contrast to Adam and Eve (OT, scene 4), Francis chose to obey God,
and such obedience rebuilds the Church, i.e., the new Eve (OT, scene 3),
brought forth from the new Adam, Christ.
 
Bay 2, north: Innocent III's blessing of Francis's Rule, which makes
Francis like a new Elijah (LMj prol.1, p. 526; 4.4, p. 552) come to
prepare the world for heavenly glory (scenes 7-9), 1) conforms with
Jacob's reception of the birthright blessing from Isaac (OT, scene 13),
which is emphasized by the twelve friars that correspond to Israel's
twelve tribes descended from Jacob, and 2) shows that Francis, in contrast
to Adam and Eve whom the angel drives from Paradise (OT, scene 5), remains
in God's favor because an angel offers him a heavenly throne. Likewise,
Francis's ecstatic contemplation is in contrast to Adam and Eve's toiling
in the fruits of wrath (OT, scene 6; lost).
 
Bay 1, north: Francis restoring peace to Arezzo, his peaceful encounter
with the Sultan, the peace he attained in ecstasy, and his hospitality
to the 'Prince of Peace' at Greccio (scenes 10-13) 1) compares to
Joseph's restoration of peace among his brothers (OT, scenes 15-16,
and 2) illustrates, in contrast to Cain's violence (OT, scenes 8-9),
that imitation of Christ is a way of peace.
 
In the thirteen scenes on the south wall, segmented by the four bays
and read from east to west, Francis is analogously compared with the
New Testament (NT) scenes in the registers above.
 
Bay 1, south: The three preaching scenes and the stigmata (scenes 16-19)
1) illustrate that Francis's life of preaching led to his mystical death
just as Christ's death led to the good news of the resurrected life (NT,
scenes 15-16), and 2) shows that just as Jesus taught (NT, scene 7) and
was sealed by the power of the Spirit (NT, scene 9), Francis's prophetic
power, preaching and seraphic passion all result from that same Spirit
(the theme of the Spirit continues from the fresco of 'Pentecost' in
the counter-façade's chiastic cycle).
 
Bay 2, south: Francis's death, the two visions, and the verification
of the stigmata (scenes 20-22) 1) signify that the impressed stigmata
on Francis's body express his true conformity with the suffering and
crucified Christ (NT, scenes 13-14), and 2) connects the anguish over
Francis's death among his brothers with the Holy Family's anguish over
Jesus' salvific destiny (NT, scenes 5-6).
 
Bay 3, south: Clare's visitation, the canonization, and the pope's dream
(scenes 23-25) 1) indicate that those who doubt Francis's sanctity betray
and mock Christ like Judas and the scourging (NT, scenes 11-12), but 2)
those who venerate Francis are like the wise men who honor Christ and
the Holy Family who humbly receive Christ (NT, scenes 3-4).
 
Bay 4, south: The three miracle scenes (scenes 26-28) 1) demonstrate
that Francis's miracles are as wondrous as Christ's miracles at Cana
and the raising of Lazarus (NT, scenes 9-10), and 2) that those miracles
announce the Good News of God's Kingdom (NT, scene 1) and rejoice in the
salvation offered by Jesus, which fulfill God's promises (NT, scene 2).
 
The narrative structure has the Francis Cycle ending where the New
Testament Cycle starts; thus, Francis leads the pilgrim to meditate on the
mysteries of Christ's life in the Incarnation and death in the Passion.
 
FROM THE OLD TO THE NEW CHIASTIC COUNTER FAÇADE CYCLE: 
LOWER AND UPPER REGISTERS, EAST WALL
 
The four main frescoes of the counter-façade form a chiastic cycle
that transitions from the Old Testament of the north wall to the New
Testament of the south wall: 'The Miracle of the Spring' is the first
scene in the chiasm, the 'Ascension' is second, 'Pentecost' third, and
'Francis Preaching to the Birds' fourth. In short, Francis prays to
the ascended Christ who sends the Holy Spirit that inspires Francis's
preaching. Moreover, the position of the two 'nature scenes' of the
lower register act as windows looking out over the Umbrian valley below,
reminding the exiting pilgrims to pray and preach in a manner akin to
Francis as they journey home and back into daily life. In effect, the
chiasm merges Heaven and Earth as it connects the rest of the narratives
in the nave.
 
Scene 1: In the eight frescoes of the patriarchs (middle register, north
wall), Moses is noticeably absent, but in 'The Miracle of the Spring'
(scene 14 in the Francis Cycle), Francis typologically represents the
new Moses who leads the Church from the Old Testament Cycle of the north
wall to the New Testament Cycle of the south wall. While Moses' faith
faltered (Num 20:11-13), preventing him from leading Israel into the
Promised Land, Francis's imitation of Christ is an exemplar of faith that
leads the Church into the fullness of living the gospel. The position of
Francis's clasped hands points the viewer to the ascended Christ in the
upper right fresco. Thus, it is to Christ that Francis offers his prayer.
 
Scene 2: In a posture that mimics Francis's, Christ reaches toward heaven,
symbolically represented by three concentric circles. It is the ascended
Christ who sends the Holy Spirit to the disciples at Pentecost. Thus,
this fresco recounts Acts 1:1-11, which is followed by the Pentecost
episode of Acts 2:1-13 in the next scene of the chiasm.
 
Scene 3: The Holy Spirit descends from a celestial orb within a
three-ring circle surrounded by tongues of fire. The three concentric
circles mimic the symbolism for heaven in the previous scene, and the
bird in the next scene.
 
Scene 4: The bird that flies from the tree toward Francis mimics the bird
symbolizing the decent of the Holy Spirit in the Pentecost scene. Thus,
Francis preaches to the birds with the Spirit's inspiration.
