Francis Receives the Stigmata
 
Nineteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Praying one day on the slope of Mount La Verna, Francis saw Christ in the
form of a Crucified Seraph, which imprinted in his hands, feet and right
side the sacred stigmata of Jesus Christ. The depicted event occurred
in September 1224.
 
Francis is represented on the left side of the scene on the narrow terrace
of a mountain; from here a steep slope falls among the rocks. Behind
Francis there rises the steep peak of a mountain with a few trees. The
Saint is in a position of genuflection with his right knee on the ground
and left knee up. His body and arms are bent backward in a gesture of awe
as he stares directly at the wondrous spectacle before him. In the right
top corner Christ Crucified, with a cross nimbus, appears suspended in
the air, born aloft by the six seraphic wings. Most of Christ’s figure is
completely covered by the wings. Christ’s arms are stretched out to form
a cross, and His right hand is slightly raised to bless Francis. Christ’s
five wounds (stigmata) emanate the five rays shining towards Francis,
which mark his body with the wounds of the Crucified.
 
The central event is so moving that the viewer runs the risk of not
seeing what is happening at the fresco’s borders. On Francis’s left,
on the narrow terrace, a small chapel is painted, and on the right,
on a lower level, there is a second chapel with the door surmounted by
a richly decorated round arch. In front of it, Francis’s companion on
Mount La Verna is reading the Gospels of Christ’s passion (LjM 13.2).
 
Francis’s line of sight points beyond the Crucified Seraph into the middle
register of the next bay, and to the fresco of Christ’s crucifixion. Thus,
in seeing the Seraph, Francis “sees” Christ’s crucifixion, which imparts
the stigmata upon him.
 
Within the context of the bay, this scene continues the four previous
episodes of Francis’s preaching where Francis preaches by what he
expressed in word and deed, but now he preaches by what was impressed
upon his flesh – Christ’s stigmata. Thus, the iconography suggests
that Francis’s life of preaching culminated in the stigmata and the
participation in Christ’s death, which is the scene directly above (middle
register). In effect, Francis’s life of preaching led to his mystical
death just as Christ’s death led to the good news of the resurrected life
(middle register). Moreover, just as Jesus was sealed by the power of
the Spirit at His baptism (upper register), the Spirit sealed Francis
with the seraphic passion of the stigmata.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 13.3
 
With the seraphic ardor of desires, therefore, he was being borne aloft
into God; and by compassionate sweetness he was being transformed into
Him Who chose to be crucified out of the excess of His love.
 
On a certain morning about the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross,
while Francis was praying on the mountainside, he saw a Seraph having
six wings, fiery as well as brilliant, descend from the grandeur of
heaven. And when in swift flight, it had arrived at a spot in the air
near the man of God, there appeared between the wings the likeness of a
man crucified, with his hands and feet extended in the form of a cross
and fastened to a cross. Two of the wings were raised above his head, two
were extended for flight, and two covered his whole body. Seeing this,
he was overwhelmed and his heart was flooded with a mixture of joy and
sorrow. He rejoiced at the gracious way Christ looked upon him under
the appearance of the Seraph, but the fact that He was fastened to a
cross pierced his soul with a sword of compassionate sorrow. He marveled
exceedingly at the sight of so unfathomable a vision, knowing that the
weakness of Christ’s passion was in no way compatible with the immortality
of the seraphic spirit. Eventually he understood from this, through the
Lord revealing it, that Divine Providence had shown him a vision of this
sort so that the friend of Christ might learn in advance that he was to
be totally transformed into the likeness of Christ crucified, not by the
martyrdom of his flesh, but by the enkindling of his soul. As the vision
was disappearing, it left in his heart a marvelous fire and imprinted
in his flesh a likeness of signs no less marvelous. For immediately the
marks of nails began to appear in his hands and feet just as he had seen
a little before in the figure of the man crucified. His hands and feet
seemed to be pierced through the center by nails, with the heads of the
nails appearing on the inner side of the hands and the upper side of the
feet and their points on the opposite sides. The heads of the nails in
his hands and his feet were round and black; their points were oblong and
bent as if driven back with a hammer, and they emerged from the flesh and
stuck out beyond it. Also his right side, as if pierced with a lance,
was marked with a red wound from which his sacred blood often flowed,
moistening his tunic and underwear. (1C 94, 3C 4)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 632-33.