The Apparition of St Francis to Gregory IX
 
Twenty-Fifth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
When Pope Gregory IX was in doubt about the wound in the side of Francis,
the latter appeared to him in a dream and said: “Give me an empty vial.”
This he took and filled it with blood that came forth from the wound in
his side. The depicted event occurred sometime during 1226 and 1228.
 
The Pope is lying on a richly adorned bed with decorated canopy in a
room with a caisson ceiling and lined all around with curtains. Two
oil lamps hang from the ceiling. Lying in the opposite direction of the
cycle’s development, Gregory IX is represented in the typical posture
of visionary scenes: reclining with eyes shut, but fully dressed,
he supports his head with one hand. With the other, he takes the vial
that Francis hands to him, as Francis lifts his cowl to expose the chest
wound. In the foreground four papal servants are sitting down. The one
on the right is asleep, the next one seems to have just been woken up,
the third is awake, and the fourth is saying his rosary.
 
Within the context of the bay, this last “canonization” scene insinuates
that those who doubt Francis’s sanctity betray and mock Christ like
Judas and the scourging (middle register). Moreover, it highlights
Francis’s sanctity with a second “verification” of the stigmata by the
Pope himself. In effect, the Pope’s verification dream ends this sequence
just as the doubting knight’s verification ended the last sequence. Thus,
to reject the stigmata is paramount to rejecting Christ.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis: The Miracles 1.2
 
The unassailable certainty of this stunning miracle is supported not only
by the witness —which is in every way worthy of our trust—of those who saw
these wounds, and touched them, but also by the wondrous apparitions and
miracles which have shone forth after his death to drive away every cloud
from our minds. Indeed, before he had inscribed this standard-bearer of
the cross in the catalog of the saints, the Lord Pope Gregory the Ninth,
of happy memory (about whom this holy man had prophetically foretold
that he would be raised up to the apostolic dignity) carried a certain
scruple of doubt in his heart about whether he had really received a
wound in his side. But one night—as that blessed pontiff himself used to
tell with tears in his eyes—blessed Francis appeared to him in a dream
with a certain show of sternness in his face. Reproving him for his inner
uncertainty, blessed Francis raised up his right arm, uncovered the wound
on his side, and asked him for a vial in which to gather the spurting
blood that flowed from it. In the dream the Supreme Pontiff brought
him the vial requested, and it seemed to be filled to the brim with the
blood, which flowed abundantly out of the side. From that day he began to
feel such devotion towards this sacred miracle, and to burn with such a
zeal for it, that he would not allow anyone to obscure these signs with
arrogant presumption without striking him with a severe rebuke. (1C 101)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 651.