Francis Gives Away His Cloak
 
Second Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
When Francis met a nobleman, destitute and poorly clothed, he was moved
by compassion and immediately took off his cloak and gave it to the
man. The depicted event occurred in the spring of 1205.
 
At the center of the scene we can see Francis, turned to the right;
he has taken his mantle off and hands it with an amiable gesture to
an elderly knight, who humbly stands in front of him. On the left is
Francis’s horse. In the background, two hills rise and their internal
slopes meet at the center, as if “pointing” to Francis. A small town
occupies the mountain peak to the left; on the right peak, behind the
poor man, there rises a castle.
 
This noble action of Francis dates back to the time after his imprisonment
in Perugia and the serious illness that had struck him. The knight’s
poverty is likely a result of the socio-economic changes brought
about by Assisi’s turbulent transition from the feudal system to the
mercantile system. Accordingly, the knight belongs to the nobility that
was losing power and Francis belongs to the bourgeoisie that was gaining
power. In effect, by humbly offering the poor knight his cloak, Francis
reconciles with his rival. The two towns in the background highlight
their reconciliation. The town of the bourgeoisie on the left and the
castle of the nobility on the right are thoroughly separated by a chasm
between them, but Francis’s compassionate gesture bridges that chasm.
 
Within the context of the bay, the second scene of Francis’s “initial
conversion” again parallels the new creation of God’s covenant with Noah
(middle register), and indicates that just as God created Adam (upper
register), Francis’s conversion is also a product of God’s work.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 1.2
 
However, up to this time, Francis was ignorant of God’s counsel for
him. For this reason, drawn in several directions to the external by
the demand of his father as well as forced down to the inferior by
the corruption of his natural origin, he had not yet learned how to
contemplate the celestial nor had he become accustomed to savor the
divine. And because affliction can enlighten spiritual awareness, the
hand of the Lord was upon him, and a change of the right hand of the
Most High, afflicting his body with prolonged illness in order to prepare
his soul for the anointing of the Holy Spirit. And when the strength of
his body was restored, dressed as usual in his fine clothes, he met a
knight who was of noble birth, but poor and badly clothed. Moved by a
pious impulse of care for his poverty, a he took off his own garments
and clothed the man on the spot. At one and the same time he fulfilled
the two-fold duty of piety by covering over the embarrassment of a noble
knight and relieving the want of a poor human being. (1C 2-5, LJS 2)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 531-32.