Preface
 
After a journey of six years, it is a pleasure to present to devotees
of Francis of Assisi and to all who love the great treasures of the
Christian tradition, this three-dimensional, real-time, virtual
reconstruction of the Basilica of St Francis. The original thirteenth
century church, constructed on a slope of Mt. Subasio near Assisi,
celebrates Francis's fidelity in following Jesus Christ, his Lord and
Master who spoke to his heart. In response, Francis found purpose for
his life: to listen, ponder and preach the Word of God. This new
twenty-first century reconstruction of the basilica makes it possible
for anyone anywhere to enter and taste something of the grace of God
that touched Francis. On this new CD-ROM the sacred space of the
church built over Francis's final resting place comes alive. The
newest technology invites the contemporary pilgrim to discover or
re-discover the Word of God, ponder it in the unfolding of Francis's
life, and go forth to preach to all nations.
 
Francis loved the sacred space of churches. In his "Testament",
written shortly before he died in 1226, Francis reflected on the
journey of his life. He wrote: "And the Lord gave me such faith in
churches that I would pray with simplicity in this way and say: 'We
adore You, Lord Jesus Christ, in all your churches throughout the
whole world and we bless You because by Your holy cross You have
redeemed the world.'" Later Brother Thomas of Celano in his "Life of
Francis" narrates that Francis taught his first brothers to pray this
same prayer on their own journeys: "in whatever place a church had
been built, even when they were not near it, but could glimpse it from
a distance." For Francis of Assisi, churches were places of prayer
before a cross, places to hear the Word of God, and places where, as
he writes in his "Letter to the Clergy," one is able to "revere above
all else the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ and His
holy names and the written words that sanctify His Body."  Churches
are places of Word and Sacrament and the very visible structure of a
church is a visual invitation to share in the redemption of the world
brought about on the cross. Francis often lived in churches and most
of his life comprised travel from one church to another, either as he
preached to the people or sought places of solitude for prayer. It is
no wonder that the early biographers spoke of Francis's vocation as a
response to the invitation of Christ: "Rebuild my church."
 
The first and second generations of friars who followed Francis in the
thirteenth century utilized all the technological means available to
them to build a church to honor the memory of one whose life and
vocation was to rebuild the church. As churches were primarily symbol
and sacrament of God's presence in the world for Francis, so also is
the church that was built in his honor. For centuries the Basilica of
Saint Francis in Assisi has invited weary pilgrims on the journey of
life to find rest, renewal, and strength. In that sacred space even
today one is nurtured by the Word of God, nourished by the most holy
Body and Blood of the Lord, and inspired by the example of the
faithful follower of Christ. The church in Assisi empowers today's
pilgrim to go forth on the journey and preach Good News of Our Lord
Jesus Christ throughout the whole world.
 
Today at the beginning of the twenty-first century the Institute of
Digital Theology, inspired by the life and example of St. Francis, has
virtually re-built the church of St. Francis. Today's virtual visitors
are thereby invited to enter and remember Francis's vision,
appreciation and faith in churches. In that same sacred space,
virtually constructed, each visitor may find a place of quiet
contemplative prayer and possibly be moved to pray the prayer Francis
prayed whenever he saw or entered churches: "We adore you, Lord Jesus
Christ, in all your churches throughout the whole world" In his
earlier years, Francis labored to rebuild churches around
Assisi. After his death, for over a period of sixty years two
generations of friars, artisans, and architects invested every skill
available to build what we now know as the Basilica of Saint Francis.
The task to rebuild this basilica in new digital media also has a
history. It began not sixty but six years ago in a 2000 doctoral
seminar on medieval architecture conducted by Professor Jack Renard at
Saint Louis University. As a doctoral student in this seminar, Daniel
Michaels produced the first 2-D virtual model of the basilica in his
attempt to study and interpret the theology operative in the
basilica's frescoes of the upper church. As a result of this work,
Daniel then changed his dissertation topic and discussed with me the
possibility of doing his doctoral dissertation on the biblical
exegesis operative in the theology of the basilica. In view of the
dynamism that was emerging from our discussion, this theme was
presented at the College Theology Society meeting at Seattle
University in June 2001 where Daniel was joined by Dr. Jay Hammond and
myself. All three of us then realized that the inter-connectivity of
all frescoes of the basilica was much grander than ever imagined and
that it was rooted in the biblical exegesis of St Bonaventure
(1221-1274).
 
To facilitate research for the dissertation, Daniel journeyed to Rome
to meet with Professors Marilyn Aronberg Lavin and Irving Lavin to
discuss the intuition concerning the inter-connectivity of the
basilica's frescoes. From Rome he traveled to Assisi to visit Father
Gerhard Ruf OFM Conv. and shared with him the news of his developing
project. In that first virtual model, Father Ruf saw the photos that
he and Stefan Diller had acquired over the previous thirty
years. Daniel's trip was fruitful. Marilyn shared with Daniel her
"theory of narrative disposition" and Father Ruf helped him begin to
unlock the theological inter-connectivity of the frescoes. Daniel
eventually completed and defended this dissertation on the upper
church's façade and counter-façade in spring 2005.
 
Since the first virtual model created by Dr. Michaels had already
received much attention, in 2002 Dr. Hammond initiated an effort to
create a second and more technologically advanced 3D model of the
basilica. His vision was that it should be accessible for those
interested in the basilica, St. Francis, and St Bonaventure's
theology. And so, through the energy and enthusiasm of both Jay and
Daniel, a non-profit foundation with the name SacraTech was
established to fund the project. All proceeds from future sales were
to be designated for support of further scholarship in the Franciscan
tradition. An international team was established to produce the second
and more advanced model.
 
However, it became apparent the demands of developing the technology
for the new 3D model required larger institutional backing. In 2004,
Dr. Hammond had moved to Saint Louis University. Dr. James Ginther,
also of Saint Louis University, already had expertise in digital
theological media and he too became interested in seeing the project
through to completion. Together the two of them successfully
approached the Saint Louis University Office of Innovation for
institutional and financial support. SacraTech subsequently divested
itself of the project and handed it over to the newly created 501
(c)(3) non-profit, Institute of Digital Theology, incorporated in the
State of Missouri and affiliated with the University of Saint
Louis. Now, as a result of further infusion of funds by St. Louis
University, this even more advanced model has finally been completed
and made available.
 
This new 3D CD-ROM has, however, had even a longer history. It is
rooted in Francis's early conversion that he initially expressed in
rebuilding churches. The hope of the many who contributed to the
realization of this new digital endeavor is for the future. May the
new opportunity here presented foster conversion and thereby encourage
the rebuilding of the church in the twenty-first century. The Assisi
frescoes, stone, and glass now present anywhere with the simple click
of a mouse proclaim one inter-connected visual message: the Gospel of
Our Lord Jesus Christ!
 
J.A. Wayne Hellmann, OFM Conv.,
Feast of St Francis, 4 October 2006
 