Verification of the Stigmata
 
Twenty-Second Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
While the mortal remains of Francis lay at the Portiuncula, a knight
named Jerome, a famous and prudent scholar, touched the nail marks and
examined the wounds in the hands, feet and side of Francis’s body. The
depicted event occurred in October 1226.
 
At first sight, this fresco appears very similar to the one depicting the
Saint’s death, but while the death scene had occurred in the open air,
this scene is represented inside a church. The rood screen (iconostasis),
which separates the sanctuary and choir from the nave, divides the scene
into two parts. The space above the iconostasis occupies one third of
the height. At the center stands a massive Crucifix. On the left there
is an icon of Mary with Child, and on the right the Archangel Michael is
painted. Between the Crucifix and Gabriel it is possible to see a segment
of the apse’s dome, which is decorated with caissons. A chandelier and
two large thuribles hang from the ceiling.
 
Unlike the fresco of Francis’s death, a large group of laymen join the
Saint’s brothers to witness the verification. Similar to that fresco,
a priest with a cope stands at the center of the crowd. To his right,
a deacon carries a bowl of holy water and an aspersorium. To his left,
another deacon holds a thurible. Here also are the four torchbearers who
wear white surplices over their cowls. Since the scene has moved inside,
several members of the crowd hold candles. The presence of the celebrant,
deacons and vested torchbearers indicate that the verification was a
liturgical event.
 
Francis is now no longer lying on a plain wooden board, but on a richly
decorated piece of cloth. In the foreground, the figure of Jerome,
with hat removed, kneels with his back to the viewer. His lavish dress
indicates that he is a nobleman. With a critical eye he examines the
stigmata on Francis’s body and investigates them with his hands too, as
he lifts up the torn cowl to touch the chest wound. Jerome’s inspection
mimics that of doubting Thomas.
 
In the right foreground there are two soldiers with shields; one turns his
head and looks beyond the edge of the scene while pointing to Francis’s
body, as if inviting the viewer to inspect the veracity of the stigmata
also. On the opposite far end, another knight with cap and baton turns
his back to the viewer. Due to the importance of the ceremony and the
size of the crowd, he is likely the captain of the guard.
 
Within the context of the bay, this last “death of Francis” scene
culminates Francis’s conformity to the suffering and crucified Christ
(middle register) with the verification of the stigmata by the doubting
knight of Assisi. Thus, Francis truly bore the wounds of Christ’s
crucifixion (middle register). The verification transformed the crowd’s
anguish over Francis’s death into joy over the wondrous miracle that
“confirmed their faith and incited their love.” The anguish mixed with
joy also points to the Holy Family (upper register) who was pained by
the world’s rejection of their Son, but consoled in knowing that God
fulfilled the covenant promises by sending the Messiah. Specifically,
the verification of Jesus’ mission with the presentation in the Temple
(upper register) parallels with the public presentation of the stigmata,
which verifies Francis’s absolute conformity with Christ.
 
This scene’s setting is particularly interesting because, while the
historical event actually occurred at the Portiuncula, this artistic
depiction has the event occurring within the Basilica of St. Francis
itself. Thus, the rood beam decorated with the icons of Mary and Child,
the Crucifix, and the Archangel Michael provide an artistic glimpse of
the now removed iconostasis that spanned the nave where it meets the
transept. The wooden protrusions are still visible in the first and last
frescoes of the Francis Cycle.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 15.2-4
 
In his blessed hands and feet could be seen the nails that had been
marvelously fashioned by divine power out of his flesh, and thus embedded
in the flesh. From whatever point they were pressed, simultaneously,
as if by a continuous and tough tendon, they pulsed at the opposite
end. Also the wound in his side could be clearly seen, which was not
inflicted on his body nor produced by human means; it was like the wound
in the Savior’s side, which brought forth in our Redeemer the mystery
of the redemption and regeneration of the human race. The nails were as
black as iron; the wound in his side was red, and because it was drawn
into a kind of circle by the contraction of the flesh looked like a most
beautiful rose. The rest of his skin, which before was inclined to be
black both naturally and from his illness, now shone white in its beauty,
prefiguring the beauty of that glorious second stole.
 
His limbs were so supple and soft to the touch that they seemed to have
regained the tenderness of childhood and to be adorned with clear signs
of innocence. The nails appeared black in his shining skin, and the wound
in his side was red like a rose in springtime so that it is no wonder
the onlookers were amazed and overjoyed at the sight of such varied
and miraculous beauty. His sons were weeping at the loss of so lovable a
father but were filled with no little joy while they kissed the seal marks
of the supreme King in him. The newness of the miracle turned their grief
into joy and transported into amazement their attempts at comprehending
it. So unique and so remarkable was the sight to all who observed it
that it confirmed their faith and incited their love. It was a matter
of amazement to those who heard of it and aroused their desire to see it.
 
When the people heard of the passing of our blessed father and news of
the miracle had spread, they hurried to the place to see with their own
eyes so that they could dispel all doubt and add joy to their love. A
great number of the citizens of Assisi were admitted to contemplate
those sacred marks with their own eyes and to kiss them with their
lips. One of them, a knight who was educated and prudent, Jerome by name,
a distinguished and famous man, had doubts about these sacred signs and
was unbelieving like Thomas. Fervently and boldly, in the presence of
the brothers and the citizens, he did not hesitate to move the nails
and to touch with his hands the saint’s hands, feet, and side. While he
was examining with his hands these authentic signs of Christ’s wounds,
he completely healed the wound of doubt in his own heart and the hearts
of others. As a result, later along with others, he became a firm witness
to this truth that he had come to know with such certainty; and he swore
to it on the Gospel. (1C 112-13, LJS 71, 3C 5)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 645-47.