Francis Renounces His Inheritance and Earthly Possessions
 
Fifth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Francis gave everything back to his father, even the clothes he was
wearing, renounced his right of inheritance, and said to his father:
“Henceforth with all certainty I can say ‘Our Father who art in heaven’
because Peter Bernardone has repudiated me.” The depicted event occurred
in the spring of 1206.
 
The scene is clearly divided into two parts: a group of people on the left
and another one on the right, with two buildings behind the groups. There
is an empty space in the middle between them. On the right side we can see
Francis already undressed. The Bishop, who stands behind him, wraps him in
his cope. Behind the Bishop there are two clergymen whose faces express
surprise and tension. On the left, Francis’s father is represented:
he is keeping his son’s clothes on his arm with an attitude of violent
anger; his right hand, clenched into a fist, is ready to strike his son,
but a friend, grasping him by the wrist, holds him back. At the far left,
two young men are discussing animatedly and their presence gives a greater
intensity to the scene. Francis’s eyes are not turned towards his father;
rather, he hears, from above, the voice of God, who has called him. The
hand that descends from heaven symbolizes God, who blesses Francis.
 
Five points are particularly noteworthy. First, the hand, which is a
sign of power, is exactly above Francis’s father. Thus, God the Father is
juxtaposed with Francis’s earthly father, who together create a symbol of
the supreme, paternal authority. Second, the “empty space” that occupies
the scene’s center separates the father and the son. It expresses the
complete break and resulting drama roused by Francis’s action; the
emptiness clearly reveals Francis’s separation from his father. Third,
for the first time in the cycle’s development, Francis faces left as
he raises his hands and eyes to God. By facing left, Francis turns
back to the call of the San Damiano Crucifix to which Francis has bound
himself. Fourth, the two groups distinguish between the religious life,
which Francis joins, and the secular life, which Francis leaves. Fifth,
from here onwards in the cycle’s development, Francis remains barefoot
while his Franciscan brothers all wear sandals.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second scene of the “fruits of
conversion” shows Francis’s gesture of renunciation pointing beyond
God’s blessing hand to the scene above: Abraham’s near sacrifice of Isaac
(middle register). Thus, like Abraham, Francis stands ready to forsake
all to follow God’s command. This connection may help explain why the
order of the middle register is not chronological. Furthermore, Francis’s
nudity contrasts with the nudity of Adam and Eve (upper register). They
cover their nakedness in shame, but Francis stands naked and unashamed
before God’s blessing hand.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 2.4
 
Thereupon the father of the flesh worked on leading the child of grace,
now stripped of his money, before the bishop of the city that he might
renounce his family possessions into his hands and return everything he
had. The true lover of poverty showed himself eager to comply and went
before the bishop without delaying or hesitating. He did not wait for
any words nor did he speak any, but immediately took off his clothes and
gave them back to his father. Then it was discovered that the man of God
had a hair shirt next to his skin under his fine clothes. Moreover, drunk
with remarkable fervor, he even took off his trousers, and was completely
stripped naked before everyone. He said to his father: “Until now I have
called you father here on earth, but now I can say without reservation,
‘Our Father who art in heaven,’ since I have placed all my treasure and
all my hope in him.” The bishop, recognizing and admiring such intense
fervor in the man of God, immediately stood up and in tears drew him
into his arms, covering him with the mantle that he was wearing. Like the
pious and good man that he was, he bade his servants give him something
to cover his body. They brought him a poor, cheap cloak of a farmer
who worked for the bishop, which he accepted gratefully and, with his
own hand, marked a cross on it with a piece of chalk, thus designating
it as the covering of a crucified and half-naked poor man. Thus the
servant of the Most High King was left naked that he might follow his
naked crucified Lord, whom he loved. Thus the cross strengthened him to
entrust his soul to the wood of salvation that would save him from the
shipwreck of the world. (1C 13, 1C 15, LJS 10, 2C 12)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 538.