The Annunciation to Joachim of Anna’s Pregnancy and Joachim’s Rejection at the Temple
 
First and Second Scene in the Upper Life of the Virgin Cycle
 
Cimabue Workshop (c. 1277-80)
 
Golden Legend 131
 
Framed by a lunette, the bifurcated fresco depicts two scenes. The top
scene shows the angel announcing to Joachim that his sterile wife Anna
will give birth to Mary. The scene is set in the wilderness where Joachim
went to live among the shepherds because he was ashamed that his offering
at the Temple was rejected because of his assumed sterility. Accordingly,
a herd of goats occupy the right of the scene.
 
The bottom scene shows Joachim making his offering at the altar of the
Temple for the feast of the Dedication, which the priest rejected. The
Golden Legend describes the event in the following manner: “Once,
when Joachim and his kinsmen traveled to Jerusalem for the feast
of the Dedication, he went with the others to the altar to make his
offering. When the priest saw him, he angrily ordered him away and
upbraided him for presuming to approach the altar of God, declaring that
is was not proper for one who was subject to the law’s curse to offer
sacrifice to the Lord of the Law, nor for a sterile man, who made no
increase to the people of God, to stand among men who begot sons.” In
the lower left stand five of Joachim’s torch bearing “kinsmen” who have
traveled to Jerusalem for the feast. In front of them is the angel who,
according to the annunciation scene in the Golden Legend, says: “I have
seen how you were put to shame, and heard the reproach of childlessness
wrongly put upon you.” Standing in front of the angel at the base
of the Temple’s steps, Joachim and another haloed man approach the
Temple to offer sacrifice. Joachim raises his right hand to the priest
who sits in the archway. The priest responds by raising his right hand
too. Presumably this depicts the moment when the priest rejects Joachim’s
offering. However, it is somewhat awkward that the temple priest who
rejected Joachim is haloed.
 
The fresco’s chronological sequence moves from the bottom fresco upwards
to the top fresco in this lunette, then across the apse to the parallel
upper fresco in the lunette, and then down to the fresco underneath.
 
Much of the fresco is structurally intact, however the area inside the
doorway has been destroyed and the oxidation of the paint’s white lead
has obscured the scenes by making the fresco appear as “negative” images.
 
Golden Legend: The Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Ryan, vol. 2,
pp. 151)