St Francis Liberates the Repentant Heretic
 
Twenty-Eighth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
St Francis liberated Pietro, a prisoner accused of heresy, and, by order
of the Pope, placed under the authority of the Bishop of Tivoli. This
event happened on the feast of St Francis, and, according to custom,
the accused man had fasted on the vigil of the feast. The depicted event
occurred sometime during 1226 and 1228.
 
Two buildings occupy the background of the scene. The round building on
the right has a large door and a spiral tower, whose depictions mimic
Trajan’s column. On the left, another architecturally distinct building
has a long series of narrow windows topped with arched niches containing
statues and a two-story tower in the shape of a loggia. In front of
this building stand a group of five clergymen: the first one carries
the pastoral staff of the Bishop, who is kneeling down in the scene’s
center offering thanks for Pietro’s conversion. From the right, Pietro
walks towards him from the building’s doorway. He holds the shackles
that bound his hands and feet; his ankles still show their marks. The
two jailors standing by the door explain to the Bishop that the chains
were miraculously removed. The Bishop responds by praising God’s power. A
priest behind the Bishop joins in the praise. In the upper left, Saint
Francis flies heavenwards as he intercedes for Pietro.
 
Within the context of the bay, this last “miracle” scene demonstrates that
Francis’s miraculous purification of heresy is as wondrous as Christ’s
miracles (middle register). Specifically, Francis flies towards the
scene of Jesus raising Lazarus. Thus, just as Jesus raises Lazarus from
the tomb, Francis frees Pietro from the “tomb” of heresy. Moreover, this
miracle, like the Annunciation, announces the Good News of God’s Kingdom,
and like the Visitation, it rejoices in the salvation offered by Jesus
(upper register).
 
The protrusion above the jailers is the wall mount for the now removed
rood screen, which was a physical and symbolic barrier separating the
sanctuary, the area reserved for the ordained, from the nave where the
laity gathered to worship. The iconostasis was removed after the Council
of Trent (ended 1563) in latter part of the sixteenth century.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis: The Miracles 5.4
 
When the Lord Pope Gregory IX was occupying the See of blessed Peter
there arose an inevitable persecution of heretics. A certain Pietro from
Alife was among those accused of heresy, and he was arrested in Rome. By
order of the same Pontiff he was handed over to the Bishop of Tivoli
for safekeeping. The bishop took him, under threat of losing episcopal
office, and so that he would not escape, bound him in leg irons and had
him confined in a dark jail cell, providing him food by weight and drink
by measure. But that man, with much weeping and praying, began to call
on blessed Francis to take pity on him, as he had heard that the vigil
of his solemnity was near. And since in purity of faith he had renounced
every error of perverse heresy, and clung wholeheartedly to Christ’s
most faithful servant Francis, he merited to be heard by God through the
intercession of blessed Francis’s merits. So, on the night before his
feast, around dusk, blessed Francis mercifully came down into the prison,
called him by name, and ordered him to stand up. The man asked in great
fear who was calling him, and heard that it was blessed Francis. He
saw the chains on his feet break and fall suddenly to the ground by
the powerful presence of the holy man; he saw the timbers of the cell
opened with their nails sprung outward: there was a clear path for his
escape. But once free, he was so astounded that he did not know enough
to flee. Instead, he let out a cry and frightened all the guards. When
the bishop was told that the man had been freed from his chains, once
he understood what had happened, that pontiff devoutly went to the
prison, and openly acknowledging the power of God, he there worshiped
the Lord. The chains were sent to the Lord Pope and the Cardinals:
on seeing what had happened, with much wonder they blessed God. (3C 93)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 667.