The Transept
 
The transept contains three cycles depicting the life of the Church. The
south transept shows two frescoes from the Passion and Glory of Christ
Cycle (east wall, lower and upper registers) and six frescoes from the
Visions of the Apocalypse Cycle (south wall, lower register and west
wall, upper register). The main wall of the south transept contains a
large stained-glass window comprised of a four-light window topped by two
quadrilobe windows, and a large rose window flanked by two small roundels
and decorative glass. The heavily damaged frescoes to the left and right
of the windows depict the angelic orders. The two five-pillared galleries
of the middle register contain six archangels, who are surmounted by
six angels each (east and west walls); some are destroyed. The archways
over the three transept walls are covered with thirty busts of angels;
some are destroyed. The Altar of St Michael the Archangel stands under the
crucifixion scene and highlights the theme of this transept's iconography:
the apocalypse and coming of the heavenly Church. Cimabue's workshop
likely decorated the north transept between 1277-80.
 
The north transept contains the other two frescoes of the Passion and
Glory of Christ Cycle (lower and upper register, east wall), which creates
four symmetrical scenes on the east wall, and six frescoes from the Lives
of the Apostles Cycle (north wall, lower register and west wall, upper
register). The fresco, 'Enthroned Christ Flanked by the Four Evangelists'
(west wall, upper register), belongs to the Apostle Cycle because it
shows that the evangelists were either apostles (Matthew and John) or
associated with the apostles (Mark with Peter and Luke with Paul). The
main wall of the south transept contains a large stained-glass window
comprised of a four-light window topped by two quadrilobe windows and a
large rose window flanked by two small roundels and decorative glass. The
walls to the left and right of the windows depict the figures of Isaiah
and David. The two five-pillared galleries of the middle register contain
six apostles each, who are surmounted by ten angels (east and west walls);
some are destroyed. The archways over the three transept walls are covered
with decorative motifs. The Altar of the Apostles stands under the north
crucifixion scene and highlights the theme of this transept's iconography:
the apostles and the perseverance of the earthly Church. Cimabue himself
likely decorated the north transept between 1265-68.
 
The six frescoes of the Visions of the Apocalypse Cycle stand in
symmetrical balance with the six frescoes of the Lives of the Apostles
Cycle. Taken together, the south and north transept signify the heavenly
or triumphant Church of the angelic order and the earthly or militant
Church of the apostolic order. Combined with the three altars dedicated
to the Apostles, Mary, and St Michael the Archangel, the transept and
apse celebrate the Church, which is spiritually born of Mary (apse),
perseveres through the leadership of the apostles (north transept),
and is fulfilled with the eschatological Kingdom of God (south transept).
