The Visions of Brother Augustine and the Bishop of Assisi
 
Twenty-First Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
At the very moment when Francis died, Brother Augustine, a Minister in
southern Italy who was sick, near death and deprived of speech, suddenly
cried out: “Wait for me, Father Francis, I’m coming with you,” whereupon
he died and followed his seraphic Father. At the same time, the Bishop
of Assisi, at Monte Gargano in southern Italy, saw the Blessed Francis
who said to him: “I’m going to heaven.” The two visions are united here
in a single scene, which ignore the limitations of space and time. The
depicted event occurred on October 3, 1226.
 
A building, architecturally similar to a church, occupies two thirds
of the fresco’s left side. In the interior, divided into a nave with
two aisles, a bed is placed crosswise. Therein Brother Augustine,
helped by a brother, is rising up with his hands reaching upwards in
an imploring gesture, which is counter to the direction of the cycle’s
development. The prolongation of the line indicated by his pleading
hands ends with the image of Francis’s soul at the top-center of the
preceding fresco. The ten friars surrounding him look at Augustine with
great astonishment. The one on the far left foreground holds out his
hand as if to question him. The friar in the right foreground shades
his eyes as he looks upward to glimpse what Augustine sees. His glance
reinforces the connection with the preceding fresco.
 
To the right of the building there is a room where a fully dressed
Bishop is laying in bed. He too is turned to the left toward the
previous fresco. His face and attitude show that he has had a vision of
the deceased Francis in a dream. The bedroom is richly decorated with
tapestries and carpets. Above the room protrudes a small mansard roof.
 
Within the context of the bay, this second  “death of Francis” scene has
Brother Augustine’s line of sight pointing beyond his vision of Francis’s
ascending soul to the fresco of the lamentation over the dead Jesus in
the middle register of the adjoining bay. In seeing the dead Francis,
Augustine sees the dead Christ. This resonates with the Major Legend:
“O truly the most Christian of men, who strove by perfect imitation to be
conformed while living to Christ living, dying to Christ dying, and dead
to Christ dead, and deserved to be adorned with an expressed likeness!”
(LMj 14.4). Thus, the two visions emphasize Francis’s true conformity
with the suffering and crucified Christ (middle register). Moreover,
the anguish of Brother Augustine and the Bishop of Assisi over Francis’s
death connects with the Holy Family’s anguish over Christ’s salvific
destiny (upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 14.6
 
At that time [Francis’s death] the minister of the brothers in Terra
di Lavoro was Brother Augustine, a man both holy and upright, who was
in his last hour and had already for some time lost his speech. In the
hearing of those who were standing about: he suddenly cried out: “Wait
for me, father, wait! Look, I’m coming with you!” The amazed brothers
asked him to whom he was speaking so boldly. And he replied: “Don’t you
see our father Francis going to heaven?” And immediately his holy soul,
leaving the flesh, followed the most holy father.
 
At that time the bishop of Assisi had been at the shrine of Saint Michael
on Monte Gargano because of a pilgrimage. Blessed Francis appeared to him
on the night of his passing and said: “Behold, I am leaving the world
and am going to heaven.” When he rose in the morning, the bishop told
his companions what he had seen, and returning to Assisi, he carefully
inquired and found out with certainty that the blessed father had departed
this world at the very hour when he appeared to him in this vision. Larks
are birds, friends of the light dreading the shadows of dusk. At the hour
of the holy man’s passing, when it was already twilight of the falling
night, they gathered in a great flock over the roof of the house and,
circling around for a long time with unusual joy, they offered testimony,
giving delight as well as confirmation, of the glory of the saint, who
so often had invited them to divine praise. (1C 110, 2C 117-18, 2C 220,
3C 32)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 644.