Francis Expels Demons from Arezzo
 
Tenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Seeing above the city of Arezzo many triumphant demons, Francis said to
his companion Brother Sylvester: “Go, and in the name of God cast out the
demons…by shouting at the gate.” Obeying the command, Sylvester shouted,
the demons fled, and peace was immediately restored. The depicted event
occurred sometime during 1213 and 1215.
 
On the right side of the scene, a small town is represented on a hill. A
multicolored group of houses set against each other protrudes above the
lower circular wall. In the wall there are two doors open: a very elegant
one, in which stands a noble bourgeois, and a simpler door, in which a
common farmer stands with his donkey. Above, seven winged devils jump from
the houses and fly towards the fresco’s upper right corner. On the left,
there is the representation of an impressive looking church whose height
overcomes that of the opposite town. At the bottom, in front of the church
and turned toward the town, St Francis kneels in prayer. In front of him,
his companion Sylvester is vigorously shouting at the fleeing devils. The
lowest devil covers his ears while the others flee away. Since Francis
was not a priest, Sylvester actually performs the exorcism as Francis
prays. Moreover, the juxtaposition of the church and the town strongly
suggests that Church authority surpasses civil authority.
 
The scene is dominated by the oblique line starting from Francis’s
shoulders and ending among the devils. A second oblique line, paralleling
the first, starts from the clasped hands of the Saint, almost touches
the raised hand of his companion and ends with the devil covering his
ears. Thus, the power to expel the devils springs from Francis’s prayer
to “Almighty God.”
 
The representations of the rich and poor man suggest that the “civil
war” in Arezzo was between the rich and poor. The rather stern look the
aristocrat gives the farmer suggests as much, and the chasm before the
wall between the two emphasizes their separation. Thus, class strife
likely caused the “demons” that destroyed the peace. However, once the
devils fled, “all the citizens reformed their civil law.”
 
Within the context of the bay, this first “peace scene” presents Francis
restoring peace to Arezzo. It compares to Joseph’s restoration of peace
among his brothers (middle register). It illustrates, in contrast to
Cain’s violence (upper register), that imitation of Christ is a way of
peace. Furthermore, Sylvester’s line of sight points to Cain’s murder
of Abel, which emphasizes that the demons’ violence at Arezzo and Cain’s
violence against Abel both come from the same source, alienation from God.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 6.9
 
It happened once that he came to Arezzo at a time when the whole
city was shaken by a civil war that threatened its destruction. Given
hospitality in the outskirts, he saw demons over the city leaping for joy
and arousing the troubled citizens to mutual slaughter. In order to put
to flight those seditious spiritual powers, he sent Brother Sylvester,
a man of dove-like simplicity, before him as a herald, saying: “Go in
front of the city gate and, on behalf of Almighty God, command the
devils to leave at once!” The genuine obedient man hurried to carry
out his father’s orders and, caught up in praise before the face of the
Lord, he began to cry out boldly in front of the city gate: “On behalf
of Almighty God and by the command of his servant Francis, get away
from here, all you demons.” At once the city returned to peace and all
the citizens reformed their civil law with great tranquility. Once the
raging pride of the demons, which had surrounded the city like a siege,
had been driven out, as the wisdom of a poor man entered in, that is,
the humility of Francis, it brought back peace and saved the city. For by
his lofty virtue of humble obedience, he had gained such powerful control
over those rebellious and obstinate spirits that he could repress their
ferocious brashness and drive back their savage violence. (2C 108)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 574-75.