The Dream of a Palace Filled with Weapons
 
Third Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
One night Francis had a dream in which he saw a splendid palace
equipped with knightly armor and weapons embellished with the sign of
the cross. When Francis asked to whom all this belonged, he received the
reply from on high: that it would all belong to him and his knights. The
depicted event occurred in the spring of 1205.
 
On the scene’s left, the niche where Francis sleeps is represented. He
sleeps lying on a bed, with his head resting on his right hand and his
face slightly turned to the right. Behind Francis stands the figure of
Christ who bends slightly towards the sleeping Francis. With His left hand
He points out to Francis the splendid palace, full of arms, body armor,
helmets and flags, all bearing the sign of the cross. With His right,
Christ blesses Francis. It is clearly a vision, as Francis’s head, even
though turned towards the viewer, is positioned to listen to the words
spoken by Christ in the dream.
 
Within the context of the bay, this scene culminates Francis’s “initial
conversion” with Christ’s exhortation to Francis to serve the Lord, which
parallels God’s admonition to Noah to build the ark (middle register). In
effect, just as the ark symbolizes the rebirth of creation, Christ’s
offer of the splendid palace signifies the “new creation” of Francis’s
conversion. The scene also indicates again that just as God created
Adam (upper register), Francis’s conversion is also a gift flowing
from God. Additionally, while Jesus’ left arm points to the splendid
palace containing the armor of spiritual warfare, He also points beyond
the palace to the next bay and to the fruits of that spiritual combat:
obedience to Christ, renunciation for Christ, and a new life reconstituted
in Christ, which reforms the Church.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 1.3
 
The following night, when he had fallen asleep, the divine kindness showed
him a large and splendid palace with military arms emblazoned with the
insignia of Christ’s cross. Thus it vividly indicated that the mercy
he had exhibited to a poor knight for love of the supreme King would be
repaid with an incomparable reward. When he asked to whom these belonged,
the response he received from on high was that all these things were for
him and his knights. Therefore, on waking up in the morning, since he was
not yet disciplined in penetrating the divine mysteries and did not know
how to pass through the visible appearance to contuit the invisible truth,
he assessed the unusual vision to be a judgment of great prosperity in
the future. For this reason, still ignorant of the divine plan, he set
out to join a generous count in Apulia, hoping in his service to obtain
the glory of knighthood, as his vision foreshadowed. Shortly after he
had embarked on his journey and had gone as far as the neighboring city,
he heard the Lord speaking to him during the night in a familiar way:
“Francis, who can do more for you, a lord or a servant, a rich person or
one who is poor?” When Francis replied that a lord and a rich person could
do more, he was at once asked: “Why, then, are you abandoning the Lord
for a servant and the rich God for a poor mortal?” And Francis replied:
“Lord, what do you want me to do?” And the Lord answered him: “Go back
to your own land, because the vision which you have seen prefigures
a spiritual outcome which will be accomplished in you not by a human
but by a divine plan.” When morning came, then, he returned in haste to
Assisi, free of care and filled with joy, and, already made an exemplar
of obedience, he awaited the Lord’s will. (1C 5, 1C 17, LJS 3, 2C 6)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 532-33.