The Crucifixion 
 
Second Scene in the Passion and Glory of Christ Cycle
 
Cimabue Workshop (c. 1277-80)
 
Matthew 27:33-54; Mark 15: 22-39; Luke 23: 33-48; John 19:16-37
 
The scene’s center depicts Christ’s crucifixion, which spans the fresco
from top to bottom. Having passed, Christ’s head with closed eyes falls
upon his chest. He is flanked by twelve angels who express affliction
and lament. Three angels collect the blood that spills from Christ’s
hands and side wound.
 
The angel that collects the blood from the side wound looks toward a
crowd to the left of Christ in a manner that expresses that He sheds
His blood for them. In front of the crowd stand four haloed personages:
a woman who reaches up to Christ, Mary with John behind her, and two
other unrecognizable figures, probably women. Mary’s red mantle hints
at the fresco’s former glory. Following the cycle’s order, the slight
differences between the two crucifixion scenes reflect the chronological
progression of the event as told in the gospel of John.
 
To the right of Christ, another angel looks back toward the exclusively
male crowd that executed Christ. Unlike the other Crucifixion scene,
there is no haloed figure in the crowd, but a man does extend his hand
toward Christ. Another difference is the two soldiers on each side of
Christ with spears extended toward Him.
 
At the foot of the cross there is the barely discernable tomb of Adam,
which symbolizes the death caused by his sin. Identified only by his halo,
there also is the kneeling Francis who prays to his Crucified savior,
Whose death overcomes Adam’s.
 
Many wonder why the transept contains two massive crucifixion scenes. A
simple answer is that they are for the Franciscan Brothers who occupy
both transepts as they pray the liturgy of the hours. Thus, as they
sing the office, the two scenes allow all the Brothers to contemplate
Christ’s Crucifixion. A side altar accompanies each Crucifixion scene.
 
The fresco suffers significant structural damage in the
foreground. Likewise, the paint has eroded in several places, obscuring
the faces and figures in the scene. The oxidation of the paint’s white
lead has further obscured the fresco by making the figures appear as
“negative” images.