Francis Preaches to the Birds
 
Fifteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle and Fourth Fresco in the Chiastic
Structure of the Counter Façade
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Going one day to the town of Bevagna, Francis preached to a flock of
birds, which expressed their joy by flapping their wings, extending
their heads forward, opening their beaks and even touching his tunic. The
depicted event occurred sometime during 1220 and 1223.
 
Like the previous fresco, this scene is narrower than the others in the
cycle. Turning right, Francis is slightly leaning toward the ground. He
gently preaches to numerous birds of various species that have gathered
around him. Francis’s gesture is proportioned to the shyness of the birds,
which quickly fly away at the slightest human movement. With his right
hand, Francis seems to bless the birds as he tries to explain to the birds
that every good, even theirs, comes from a gracious God. Behind Francis,
a companion observes the event with great wonder, but his gesture is
also restrained so as to avoid scaring the birds away.
 
Within the context of the counter-façade, the bird that flies from the
tree toward Francis corresponds with the bird symbolizing the descent of
the Holy Spirit in the Pentecost scene in the upper left fresco. Thus,
Francis preaches to the birds with the Spirit’s inspiration. The theme
of preaching continues in the next four scenes of the Francis Cycle.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 12.3
 
When he was approaching Bevagna, he came upon a place where a large
flock of birds of various kinds had gathered. When the holy one of
God saw them, he swiftly ran to the spot and greeted them as though
they had human reason. They all became alert and turned toward him,
and those perched in the trees bent their heads as he approached them
and in an uncommon way directed their attention to him. He approached
them and intently encouraged them all to hear the word of God, saying:
“My brother birds, you should greatly praise your Creator, who clothed
you with feathers, gave you wings for flight, confided to you purity of
the air, and governs you without your least care.” While he was saying
this and similar things to them, the birds fluttered about in a wonderful
way. They began to stretch their necks, spread their wings, open their
beaks, and look at him. He passed through their midst with amazing fervor
of spirit, touching them with his tunic. Yet none of them left the place
until the man of God made the sign of the cross and gave them a blessing
and permission to leave; then they all flew away together. His companions
waiting along the way contuited all these things. Upon returning to them,
the pure and simple man began to accuse himself of negligence because
he had not previously preached to the birds. (1C 58, LJS 37, 3C 20)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 624.