The Death of the Knight of Celano
 
Sixteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
A nobleman of Celano invited Francis to dinner. Francis warned the man
to confess his sins. The man confessed, put his affairs in order, and
while the others were at table, he suddenly died in God’s grace. The
depicted event occurred sometime in 1220.
 
On the right of the scene there is the representation of a nobleman seized
by sudden death. He is held by a woman whose face shows her fright over
his sudden death. In vain she strains to find some trace of life. Four
more women with loose hair come to her aid: one prays with hands clasped,
another extends her arms to help, a third bends towards the dead man in
an attitude of fear mixed with curiosity, and the fourth kneels and holds
her face in an expression of shock. Several other guests, mostly women,
have come to see the incident.
 
The left side of the scene shows a prepared table under a canopy. Behind
the table, Francis stands with his right hand on the table as his left
hand points at the dead knight. Francis’s companion still sits quietly at
the table holding a knife. The man in red makes the connection between
the dead knight and Francis; his left hand point to the knight and his
right to Francis. His expression suggests that the events transpired as
Francis had predicted. Since Francis was not a priest, it is actually
the sitting friar next to Francis who hears the knight’s confession,
i.e., “telling all of his sins in confession to [Francis’s] companion.”
 
Within the context of the bay, this first “preaching scene” shows that
Francis used his power of prophesy to instruct others. Specifically,
Francis teaches contrite confession so that the knight can die and rise
again, which parallels Christ’s death and resurrection (middle register).
Furthermore, just as Jesus taught and was sealed by the Spirit’s power
(upper register), Francis’s prophetic teaching flows from that same
Spirit (the theme of the Spirit’s inspiration continues from the fresco
of Pentecost in the counter-façade’s chiastic cycle).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 11.4
 
At another time, after his return from overseas, he went to Celano
to preach; and a certain knight invited him very insistently, with
humble devotion, to dine with him. So he came to the knight’s home and
the whole family delighted at the arrival of the poor guests. Before
they took any food, the man offered prayers and praise to God as was
his custom, standing with his eyes raised to heaven. When he finished
his prayer, he called his kind host aside and confidentially told him:
“Look, brother host, overcome by your prayers, I have entered your home
to eat. Now heed my warnings quickly because you shall not eat here but
elsewhere. Confess your sins right now, contrite with the sorrow of true
repentance; and leave nothing in you unconfessed that you do not reveal in
a true confession. The Lord will reward you today for receiving His poor
with such devotion.” The man agreed to the saint’s words without delay;
and telling all of his sins in confession to his companion, he put his
house in order and did everything in his power to prepare for death. Then
they went to the table; and while the others began to eat, suddenly their
host breathed forth his spirit, carried away by sudden death according
to the words of the man of God. In recompense for the kindness of his
hospitality, it happened according to the word of Truth that because
he had received a prophet, he received a prophet’s reward. Through the
prophetic warning of the holy man, that devout knight prepared himself for
a sudden death so that, protected by the armor of repentance, he escaped
perpetual damnation and entered into the eternal dwellings. (2C 31, 3C 41)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 614-15.