The Crib at Greccio
 
Thirteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
In memory of Christ’s birth at Bethlehem, Francis wanted to reproduce
the scene. He asked that a crib be prepared, straw fetched, and an ox and
donkey be brought to the crib. He then gave a sermon about the birth of
the poor King. While he was in prayer, a knight present for this ceremony
saw the Infant Jesus come and take the place of the baby that Francis
had placed in the crib. The depicted event occurred in December of 1223.
 
The foreground is separated from the background by a marble rood wall
(iconostasis), surmounted by a pulpit on the left and the backside of a
suspended cross. Several women peer through the door of the iconostasis,
but do not enter the presbytery; they want to take part in the festivity
of the crib, but the lectern, standing between them and the Saint,
prevents them from joining the ceremony.
 
Francis, wearing deacon’s vestment, is turned to the right and kneels
in front of a crib. He holds the Child wrapped in swaddling clothes. The
Child and Francis directly look at one another. A very small ox and donkey
are lying in front of the crib. On the right side, under a little niche
similar to a ciborium, a priest is celebrating Mass. Everyone looks at
Francis while four friars sing aloud. The man dressed in blue to the
right of the lectern is the knight who saw the Infant Jesus appear in
the manger.
 
Within the context of the bay, this fourth “peace scene” culminates
the theme of peace with Francis greeting the “Prince of Peace” at
Greccio. Joseph’s restoration of peace by forgiving his brothers for
their transgression concurs with Christ’s peace (middle register), but
Cain’s murder subverts Christ’s peace (upper register). By embracing
the Infant Jesus, Francis embraces the good news of “peace on earth”
(Lk 2:14) as he conforms himself to Christ’s way of peace.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 10.7
 
It happened, three years prior to his death, that he decided to celebrate
at the town of Greccio the memory of the birth of the Child Jesus with
the greatest possible solemnity, in order to arouse devotion. So that
this would not be considered a type of novelty, he petitioned for and
obtained permission from the Supreme Pontiff. He had a manger prepared,
hay carried in and an ox and an ass led to the spot. The brethren are
summoned, the people arrive, the forest amplifies with their cries, and
that venerable night is rendered brilliant and solemn by a multitude of
bright lights and by resonant and harmonious hymns of praise. The man
of God stands before the manger, filled with piety, bathed in tears,
and overcome with joy. A solemn Mass is celebrated over the manger,
with Francis, a levite of Christ, chanting the holy Gospel. Then he
preaches to the people standing around him about the birth of the poor
King, whom, whenever he means to call him, he called in his tender
love, the Babe from Bethlehem. A certain virtuous and truthful knight,
Sir John of Greccio, who had abandoned worldly military activity out
of love of Christ and had become an intimate friend of the man of God,
claimed that he saw a beautiful little child asleep in that manger whom
the blessed father Francis embraced in both of his arms and seemed to wake
it from sleep. Not only does the holiness of the witness make credible the
vision of the devout knight, but also the truth it expresses proves its
validity and the subsequent miracles confirm it. For Francis’s example,
when considered by the world, is capable of arousing the hearts of those
who are sluggish in the faith of Christ. The hay from the crib was kept by
the people and miraculously cured sick animals and drove away different
kinds of pestilence. Thus God glorified his servant in every way and
demonstrated the efficacy of his holy prayer by the evident signs of
wonderful miracles. (1C 84-87, LJS 54-55)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 610-11.