The Miracle of the Spring
 
Fourteenth Fresco in the Francis Cycle and First Fresco in the Chiastic
Structure of the Counter Façade
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
Because he was infirm, Francis was ascending a mountain on a donkey, which
belonged to a poor man who was extremely thirsty from the journey. In
response to the man’s thirst, Francis prayed and caused water to gush
forth from a rock that quenched the man’s thirst. The depicted event
occurred sometime during 1220 to 1223.
 
This fresco is as high as the preceding ones, but narrower. Francis
occupies the center of the fresco where he kneels and addresses his prayer
of intense supplication to heaven. His posture, hands and demeanor, all
express his certainty that his supplication will be heard. Two rocky
hills slope down very steeply, after the Byzantine style, and meet at
the scene’s center behind the figure of Francis. The left mountain is
dark and the right one is brighter so as to make Francis’s dark robe
stand out better. On the left side, behind a saddled donkey, two friars
look at each other with inquisitive astonishment. The reason for their
astonishment is visible on the scene’s lower right side where water
gushes from a rock to quench the thirst of the man who crawls towards
the spring and avidly drinks the refreshing water.
 
Within the context of the counter-façade, the position of Francis’s
clasped hands and intent gaze points the viewer to the upper right fresco
of Christ’s ascension. Thus, it is to the ascended Christ that Francis
offers his devout supplication. Furthermore, in the eight frescoes of the
patriarchs (middle register, north wall), Moses is noticeably absent;
but in this scene, Francis typologically represents the new Moses who
leads the Church from the Old Testament Cycle of the north wall to the
New Testament Cycle of the south wall. While Moses’ faith faltered (Num
20:11-13), preventing him from leading Israel into the Promised Land,
Francis’s imitation of Christ is an exemplar of faith that leads the
Church into the fullness of living the gospel.

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 7.12
 
Another time as the man of God wanted to go to a hermitage to spend
more time in contemplation, because he was weak, he rode on a donkey
belonging to a certain poor man. As it was summertime, that man climbed
up a mountain following Christ’s servant. Worn out from the long and
grueling journey, and weakened further by a burning thirst, he began to
cry out urgently after the saint: “Look, I’ll die of thirst if I don’t
get a drink immediately!” Without delay the man of God leaped down from
the donkey, knelt on the ground, raised his hands to heaven and prayed
unceasingly until he understood that he had been heard. After he had
finished his prayer, he told the man: “Hurry over there to the rock and
you will find living water which at this very hour Christ has mercifully
brought forth water from the rock for you to drink.” How amazingly kind
God is, so easily bowing to his servants! A thirsty man drank water from
the rock by the power of another’s prayer and took a drink from the most
solid rock. There was no stream of water there before, nor could any be
found since, even after a careful search. (3C 15)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 584.