The Narratives
 
To appreciate the artwork more fully, the modern viewer needs
to understand how the images in the upper church function. Their
pictorial decoration serves a larger purpose than merely making the
space more solemn and beautiful. Rather, they participate in the
activity of preaching. Like the liturgy and the 'new' Franciscan
preaching that was rapidly growing in size and popularity when the
Basilica of Assisi was decorated, the images are instructive because
their pictorial narratives spread God's word visually. Even though the
pictorial patterns may be unfamiliar, their primeval function remains:
to preach and teach God's word to all including the unlettered. Thus,
there is a very close relationship between the figurative representations
and the written and spoken word. Accordingly, all the pictorial cycles
in the upper church have textual roots. Three of the most prominent
are: Scripture, Bonaventure's 'The Major Legend of Saint Francis,'
and 'The Golden Legend' by James of Voragine. When a modern viewer
'reads' a pictorial representation, it is very helpful to reference its
textual source. Moreover, the viewer should realize that the figurative
representations are not restricted by a text's linear sequence. Rather,
the three-dimensional space allows for multiple and simultaneous
inferences and associations that bathe the imagination in metaphor
and symbol. For example, the pictorial narrative of the Francis Cycle
does not simply represent Francis's life in chronological order, but
also communicates with the themes and protagonists in the scenes from
the Old and New Testaments in the two registers above, as well as with
adjoining frescoes or those across the nave. In short, the space allows
multi-directional and multi-dimensional communication among images. Thus,
individual scenes should not simply be 'read' in isolation, but should be
interpreted within the metaphoric associations that were so familiar to
the medieval worldview. An entrée into this worldview is the medieval
practice of exegesis according to the four senses of Scripture, which
provides a helpful example of multivalent interpretation. St Bonaventure
describes the four senses in which the Scriptures may be understood:
 
    Scripture has depth, which consists in the multiplicity of its
    mystical understandings. For, besides its literal meaning, in
    many places it can be interpreted in three ways: allegorically,
    morally, and anagogically. Allegory occurs when by one thing is
    indicated by another, which is a matter of belief. The tropological
    or moral understanding occurs when, from something done, we learn
    something else that we should do. The anagogical meaning, a kind of
    'lifting upwards,' occurs when we are shown what it is we should
    desire, that is, the eternal happiness of the blessed. . .Thus,
    Sacred Scripture, given to us by the Holy Spirit, takes up the book
    of creation, making it relate to its own end through a three-fold
    manner of understanding. The tropological meaning lets us know what
    we should resolutely do; the allegorical meaning, what we should
    truly believe; the anagogical meaning, what we should desire for our
    eternal delight. In this way, cleansed by virtuous deeds, illumined
    by radiant faith, and made perfect by burning love, we may come at
    last to the prize of eternal happiness (Breviloquium prol.4.4-5;
    Monti, pp. 15-16).
 
The application of Bonaventure's description of Scriptural exegesis to
the nave's iconograpic decoration as a 'book of creation' can generate
innumerable insights. For example, the scene of 'Francis Renouncing His
Inheritance and Earthly Possessions' can be viewed literally in that it
recounts a purportedly historical event during Francis's conversion. It
can be viewed allegorically with the scenes above in that Francis's
gesture of renunciation points to Abraham's near sacrifice of Isaac,
which teaches that one must be willing to forsake all to follow God. It
can be viewed tropologically in the sense that the scene challenges the
viewer to an examination of conscience and to the awareness of possessions
that hinder intimacy with God. And Francis's nudity can be interpreted
anagogically in that he stands naked and unashamed before God's blessing
hand, which is in contrast to the scene of Adam and Eve above, who respond
to their decisive decision to disobey God by covering their nakedness in
shame. This teaches the viewer to hope for and desire a relationship with
God where the shame of sin has no place. Of course there are a myriad of
other possible interpretations, but the interpretive principle is rather
simple: the scenes in the iconographic decoration can be interpreted
on at least four levels: according to the depicted event in isolation
(literal) and by faith (allegory), hope (anagogy), and love (tropology)
in relation to the surrounding scenes. In all of this, the viewer is
drawn into the iconographic narrative via his or her meditation on and
imitation of the scenes' exhortations.
 
While the richness of the Basilica's theology is indeed magnificent,
the medium that conveys the theology, the artwork of the upper
church, has unfortunately suffered serious damage over its 700-year
history. Throughout, several frescoes suffer significant damage or
are completely destroyed, with only white plaster remaining. Periodic
earthquakes that shake the Umbrian valley have caused much of this
damage. The most recent was in 1997, which damaged the counter-façade
archway, the Vault of the Church Doctors and the Vault of the
Evangelists. However, not all the damage is seismic. Over time
Cimabue's white lead paint oxidized, resulting in a look that resembles a
'negative' photograph. Moreover, Cimabue did not employ the technique of
'true fresco' (buon fresco) where the paint was applied to a still damp
plaster, which absorbs and bonds with the pigment. Rather, he painted
on dry plaster, a technique that is not as durable or long lasting. In
contrast, 'buon fresco' was first applied to the frescoes in the nave,
and helps explain their drastic difference from the frescoes in the apse
and transept.
