The Healing of John of Llerda
 
Twenty-Sixth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
St Francis undid the bandages and delicately touched the wounds of Juan
of Llerda who was deathly ill. The physicians had given up all hope,
but the sick man prayed to Francis and received a miraculous cure. The
depicted event occurred sometime during 1226 and 1228.
 
The scene presents an alcove subdivided into three zones by two slender
columns that support the roof and allow the viewer to look inside. In the
far right there stands a bed. A curtain lifted up and fastened to one of
the columns reveals Juan. The central threshold, between the two columns,
also has a retracted curtain. This threshold has a higher ceiling than
the side rooms.
 
Behind the bed, Francis, accompanied by two Angels, appears and unbandages
Juan’s mortal wounds. One of the Angels carries a bowl containing some
ointment. Even though Juan is awake, he is near death. On the left,
in the room’s threshold, two women are talking with the doctor who,
by moving his right hand downwards, makes them understand that there
is no hope left. In response to the news, one woman holds her face in
disbelief. However, behind them, the two Angels and Francis’s healing
touch convey the supernatural power that heals Juan. Strangely, Francis’s
hands do not bear the stigmata.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first “miracle” scene demonstrates
that Francis’s miraculous healing is as wondrous as Christ’s miracles at
Cana and the raising of Lazarus (middle register). Moreover, like the
Annunciation, this miracle announces the Good News of God’s Kingdom,
and like the Visitation, it rejoices in the salvation offered by Jesus
who fulfills God’s promises (upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis: The Miracles 1.5
 
In the city of Llerda in Catalonia a certain man called Juan, who was
devoted to blessed Francis, happened to pass by one evening on the road
where there was concealed a deadly ambush—not for him, actually, for he
harbored no hostilities, but for another man who looked like him and who
often was in his company. One of the men who lay in ambush leaped out
of hiding and, taking him for his enemy, stabbed him with deadly blows,
wounding him repeatedly, so there was no hope of his recovery. Indeed, the
first blow he struck practically lopped off the man’s arm and shoulder,
and another thrust just below the man’s nipple left such a gaping wound
that his breath came out through the opening strongly enough to put out
the flames of six candles at once. The physicians pronounced his healing
to be impossible, for gangrene had begun to set in his wounds, giving
out such an unbearable stench that even his own wife could not bear
it. So, since he was beyond all human aid, he turned with all possible
devotion to beg the protection of the blessed Father Francis, on whom
(as well as on the blessed Virgin) he had called with great trust even
in the middle of the ambush. And behold, as the poor man lay all alone
on his bed, unable to sleep and moaning Francis’ name over and over,
it seemed to him that someone dressed in the habit of a Lesser Brother
came in through the window and approached him. This person called him by
name and said: “Since you have placed your trust in me, behold, the Lord
will deliver you.” When the wounded man asked him who he was, he answered
that he was Francis. And as soon as he said this, he approached the man’s
wounds, undid the bandages, and seemed to anoint all the wounds with an
ointment. No sooner did he feel the gentle touch of those sacred hands,
which had the capacity to heal by the power of the Savior’s stigmata,
than the gangrene was driven out, the flesh was restored and the wounds
were closed, so that he was once again in perfect health. After doing
this, the blessed Father disappeared. The man, feeling himself healed,
burst out exultantly into shouts of praise to God and Saint Francis,
and cried out for his wife. She hurried in at a run, and, as she saw
the man standing up whom she had expected to bury the next day, she
was utterly terrified and stunned, so that by her screams she gathered
the whole neighborhood. The people of the household hurried in, and
tried to force him back into bed, thinking he was in delirium, while
he fought them off, insisting that he was cured, and showing them that
this was so. At this they were stupefied, struck with such amazement
that they all seemed out of their minds. They thought what they were
seeing a fantastic vision, since they saw the man who just a while ago
had been mangled with frightful wounds, and practically withered away,
now standing before them in the pink of health and in high spirits. But
the one who was healed said, “Do not be afraid! Do not believe that what
you see is false, because Saint Francis has just left this place and has
cured me completely of every wound by the touch of those sacred hands.” As
the news of this miracle spread, the whole town hastened there. Seeing
the power of blessed Francis’s stigmata by means of such an obvious
miracle, they were at the same time filled with wonder and with joy,
and extolled Christ’s standard-bearer with loud cries of praise. It was
fitting indeed that the blessed Father, now already dead in the flesh,
and living with Christ, should give health to a mortally wounded man by
the wonderful manifestation of his presence and the gentle touch of his
sacred hands, since he bore upon his body the brand marks of the One who,
by His merciful death and wondrous resurrection, had healed the human
race —which had been wounded and left half alive—healing us by the power
of His wounds. (3C 11-13, 3C 149)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 653-54.