The Grief of Clare and the Poor Clares Over the Body of Francis
 
Twenty-Third Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
The assembled crowd, carrying branches and lit candles, transported the
sacred body, adorned with the stigmata, towards Assisi. At San Damiano
the procession halted so that Clare and her cloistered sisters might
see the sacred remains. The depicted event occurred in October 1226.
 
In the foreground, a few high-ranking citizens put down the catafalque on
which the corpse of Saint Francis lays. The Poor Clares rush out of the
church’s three-portals to reverence his stigmatized body. Leading them
all, a haloed Saint Clare bends over her spiritual father and co-founder
of her Order. She looks at his face with grief as her left hand brushes
against the chest wound. Another nun bends at Francis’s side and lifts
up his hand to kiss the wound, while another kisses the wound on his
feet with the same veneration.
 
The right side background contains a church with one nave and two
aisles. In the upper gable, a Romanesque-style window is flanked by two
statues holding scrolls. Below, two rose windows with eight mullions
each illuminate the interior. Between the windows, a statue of Christ is
encased in a miniature vault, to which six Angels raise their eyes. Below,
St Damian and two Angels are represented in the lunette. The entire
façade is richly decorated with paintings and sculptures, which give it
a typical Gothic look.
 
From the left, a large throng of people follows the catafalque and gather
around the dead body of Francis. The torch-bearing friars lead, others
in the procession carry tree-branches. Some sing, but most just watch
the scene of Clare’s veneration of Francis before the church. Behind
the crowd there is an olive-tree into which a boy has climbed to tear
off some branches to throw down for the members in the procession.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first scene of “Francis’s
canonization” indicates that those who venerate Francis are like the
wise men who honor Christ and the Holy Family who humbly receive Christ
(upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 15.5
 
His brothers and sons, who had been called to their father’s passing,
with the whole multitude of people, spent that night in which the blessed
confessor of Christ departed, in the divine praises. They did this in
such a way that it seemed to be a vigil of angels, not a wake for the
dead. When day was breaking, the crowds that had assembled took branches
from the trees and carried his sacred body to the city of Assisi, with
a blaze of many candles and hymns and songs. As they passed the church
of San Damiano, where the noble virgin Clare, now glorious in heaven,
was then living enclosed with the virgins, they stopped for awhile so
that those holy nuns could see and kiss his sacred body, adorned with
its heavenly pearls. Finally reaching the city with great rejoicing,
with all reverence they placed the precious treasure they were carrying
in the church of Saint George. There as a boy he learned his letters,
there he later preached for the first time, and there, finally, he
received his first place of rest. (1C 116-18, LJS 72)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, p. 647.