Francis before the Crucifix at San Damiano
 
Fourth Fresco in the Francis Cycle
 
Giotto Workshop (1296-1300)
 
When Francis was praying before the image of the Crucified Savior, a
voice from the cross spoke to him and said three times: “Francis go and
repair my house which is falling into ruin,” which signified the Roman
Church of Francis’s day. The depicted event occurred in the fall of 1205.
 
A chapel takes up the whole surface of the scene. Francis is kneeling
and praying. The large scale of his figure accentuates his central
position. He is looking at the Crucified rising over an altar on the
scene’s right side. The Crucifix represents Christ in a pre-twelfth
century Byzantine style with eyes open. Christ’s  head is slightly
bent towards Francis, which conveys the act of Christ speaking to
Francis. Columns that support the upper part of the church allow the view
of the interior, which emphasizes that the chapel is mostly destroyed,
that is, the wall opening is just part of the ruin that also includes
the façade, the sidewalls, and the apse.
 
A tension between the two figures dominates this scene. The apse is
surmounted by a ruined roof, therefore the altar and the Crucifix are
abandoned to the fury of the elements. In contrast, Francis kneels
in that part of the church where the roof is still in good condition,
and thus, he offers Christ safe shelter.
 
Within the context of the bay, this first scene in the “fruits
of conversion” sequence corresponds with Abraham’s call to
leave his fatherland and enter into a covenant with God (middle
register). Specifically, Francis’s line of sight passes through the
crucifix to the scene above, suggesting that just as God spoke to
Abraham through the angels, God also spoke to Francis via the San Damiano
crucifix. This “connection” may help explain why the order of the two
Abraham scenes in the middle register is not chronological. Moreover,
Francis’s decision to obey Christ’s command to “repair my house” contrasts
with Adam and Eve’s disobedience that undermines the order of God’s
creation (upper register).

 
The Major Legend of Saint Francis 2.1
 
Because the servant of the Most High had no other teacher in these matters
except Christ, His kindness visited him once more in the sweetness of
grace. For one day when Francis went out to meditate in the fields, he
walked near the church of San Damiano, which was threatening to collapse
because of age. Impelled by the Spirit, he went inside to pray. Prostrate
before an image of the Crucified, he was filled with no little consolation
as he prayed. While his tear-filled eyes were gazing at the Lord’s cross,
he heard with his bodily ears a voice coming from that cross, telling
him three times: “Francis, go and repair my house which, as you see,
is all being destroyed.” Trembling, Francis was stunned at the sound of
such an astonishing voice, since he was alone in the church; and as he
absorbed the power of the divine words into his heart, he fell into an
ecstasy of mind. At last, coming back to himself, he prepared himself to
obey and pulled himself together to carry out the command of repairing the
material church, although the principal intention of the words referred
to that which Christ purchased with his own blood, as the Holy Spirit
taught him and as he himself later disclosed to the brothers. Then,
after fortifying himself with the sign of the cross, he arose, and
taking cloth to sell, he hurried off to a city called Foligno. There,
after selling everything he had brought with him, even the horse he was
riding, the successful merchant quickly returned with the price he had
obtained. Returning to Assisi, he reverently entered the church he had
received the command to repair. When he found the poor priest there,
he showed him fitting reverence, offered him money for the repair of
the church and for the use of the poor, and humbly requested that he be
allowed to stay with him for a time. The priest agreed to his staying
there but, out of fear of his parents, would not accept the money that
the true scorner of wealth had thrown on a windowsill, valuing it no
more than if it were dust. (1C 8-9, LJS 6, Off 11 II, 2C 9-11, 3C 2)
 
Francis of Assisi: Early Documents, vol. II: The Founder, pp. 536-37.